Call of Cthulhu 
Call of Cthulhu originally written by Sandy Petersen, with later revision by Lynn Willis. This revised 7th Edition is a collaboration between Paul Fricker and Mike Mason. Edited by Scott Dorward, Badger McInnes, Mike Mason, Charlie Krank. Design Format: Mike Mason. Layout: Badger McInnes, Nick Nacario, Charlie Krank, Cover illustration by: Sam Lamont. Chapter Illustrations by: Jonathan Wyke, Paul Carrick, Rob Gould, François Launet, Victor Leza, Charles Wong, Mike Perry, Nicholas Cloister, Antonio Luis, Kalli Schulz. Interior Illustrations by:  Rachel Kahn, Grilla, Chris Huth, Loïc Muzy, Paul Carrick, Scott Neil, Jonathan Wyke, Victor Leza, Sam Lamont, Celeste Burcham, Caryad, Antonio Mainez, Tom Sullivan, Marco Morte, Cartography by: Steff Worthington. 

Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank the following people for their on going support and assistance: Charlie Krank, Christian Grussi, Keary Birch, Alan Bligh, John French, Scott Dorward, Matthew Sanderson, Dean Engelhardt, Matt Anderson, Tim Vincent, Kevin White, Garrie Hall, Pedro Ziviani, Dan Kramer, Scott David Aniolowski, Brian Courtemache, Brian Sammons, Chad Bowser, Tom Lynch, and of course Sandy Petersen, without whom none of this would have happened! 
Dedications 
To my father, who introduced me to Lovecraft and to science fiction in general. From one of his books I read my first Love­craftian story, “Pickman’s Model.” 
Thanks, Dad. —S.P. 

For my boys, Felix and Ernest. You're the best! —Mike Mason 
To my friend, Phillip Sidebotham, for introducing me to both roleplaying games and the works of H.P. Lovecraft. 
—Paul Fricker 

To the fans and backers of Call of Cthulhu and Chaosium who helped to make this new edition a reality. To all those around the world who give their time and energy to spread the word, and are truly one of us. Our thanks to you all! 
In Sanity—Chaosium 

Clear Credit 
Paul Fricker revised and wrote the 7th edition rules with de­velopment and additional material from Mike Mason. Chap­ter 11 was written by Paul Fricker and Mike Mason. Chapters 5, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 were revised with additional material by Mike Mason and Paul Fricker. Amidst the Ancient Trees was written by Matthew Sanderson with additional material by Mike Mason. Crimson Letters was written by Alan Bligh with additional material by Mike Mason, and playtest note from Christopher Smith Adair. The timelines were updated by John French and Mike Mason. Updated equipment costs were provided by Mike Mason and Dan Kramer. The 7th edi­tion investigator sheets were designed by Dean Engelhardt. Joe Schillizzi also helped with the revised weapon tables. 
This edition additionally draws from earlier editions of the Call of Cthulhu rules. The following authors’ work has been used or revised in this current edition: Sandy Peters­en, Lynn Willis, Keith Herber, Kevin Ross, Mark Morrison, William Hamblin, Scott David Aniolowski, Michael Tice, Shannon Appel, Eric Rowe, Bruce Ballon, William G. Dunn, Sam Johnson, Brian M. Sammons, Jan Engan, Bill Barton, Les Brooks, and friends. 
Original compositions from earlier editions revised and/ or used in this edition: Keith Herber wrote the Necronom­icon chapter, Mythos Prehistory, H. P. Lovecraft and the Cthulhu Mythos, Prehistory of the Cthulhu Mythos, and (with Kevin Ross) Books of the Cthulhu Mythos. Les Brooks compiled sample gear and prices. Kevin Ross tracked down many quotes and sources, and added material and statistics. Scott Aniolowski concentrated on monster descriptions and statistics. Long ago Bill Dunn wrote the Guide to Sanity Loss­es. Michael Tice, Eric Rowe, and Shannon Appel assembled the Sanity information. Shannon Appel also constructed the Alien Technology section, using some inventions from past supplements, and did revisionary work on Deities, Creatures, and Mythos Prehistory. Bruce Ballon originally revised the Sanity chapter and wrote the Dangerousness Criteria exam­ple, the timeline, and summaries of drugs and treatments. Jan Engan contributed the occult book summaries. Brian Sammons originally created the Mythos tomes table. Sam Johnson wrote some of the stats for the weapon table. Bill Barton helped provide the stats for Chaugnar Faugn, the Colour, and others. 
The reproduction of material from within this book for the purposes of personal or corporate profit, by photographic, optical, electronic, or other media or methods of storage and retrieval, is prohibited. Address questions and comments by mail to: Chaosium, Inc. 22568 Mission Blvd. #423 Hayward CA 94541 U.S.A. Please do not phone in game questions; the quickest answer may not be the best answer. Our web site www.chaosium.com always contains latest release information and current prices. Chaosium Publication @@@@@@@. ISBN @@@@@@@@@ Published in @@@@@@@ 2014. Printed in U.S.A. 
Call of Cthulhu is published by Chaosium Inc. 
Call of Cthulhu (7th Edition) is copyright ©1981, 1983, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1998, 1999, 2001, 2004, 2005, 2013, 2014 by Chaosium Inc.; all rights reserved. 
Call of Cthulhu® is the registered trademark of Chaosium Inc. 
Similarities between characters in Call of Cthulhu and persons living or dead are strictly coincidental. 
All material concerning Shudde-M’ell and the Cthonians, and all other inventions of Brian Lumley as portrayed in his works, specifically The Burrowers Beneath, are used with his kind permission. J. Ramsey Campbell’s “Cold Print” ©1969 August Derleth. William Lumley’s and H. P. Lovecraft’s “The Diary of Alonzo Typer” ©1970 by August Derleth. Colin Wilson’s “The Return of the Lloigor” ©1969 August Derleth. Frank Belknap Long’s “Hounds of Tindalos” ©1946 Estate of Frank Belknap Long. Clark Ashton Smith’s “The Return of the Sorcerer” ©1931 Clayton Magazines Inc. Clark Ashton Smith’s “The Nameless Offspring ©1932 Clayton Magazines. Inc. The quotes from “The Inhabitant of the Lake” are ©1964 by J. Ramsey Campbell and “The Last Revelation of Gla’aki” ©2013 Ramsey Campbell,. Clark Ashton Smith’s “The Seven Geases” ©1934 Popular Fiction Publishing Co.Derleth’s “The Dweller in Darkness” ©1953 August Derleth. Eddy C. Bertin’s “Darkness, My Name Is” ©1976 Edward P. Berglund. Bloch’s “Notebook Found in a Deserted House” ©1951 Weird Tales. Derleth’s “The Gable Window” ©1957 Candar Publishing Co. Derleth’s “The Lurker at the Threshold” ©1945 August Derleth. Donald 
J. Walsh, Jr.’s “The Rings of the Papaloi” ©1971 August Derleth. Derleth’s “The Thing That Walked on the Wind” ©1933 The Clayton Magazines Inc. Blish’s “More Light” ©1970 Anne McCaffrey. Kuttner’s “The Salem Horror” ©1937 Popular Fiction Publishing Co. Clark Ashton Smith’s “The Treader of the Dust” ©1935 Popular Fiction Publish­ing Co. Derleth’s “The Lair of the Star-Spawn” ©1932 Pop­ular Fiction Publishing Co. Carter’s “Zoth-Ommog”©1976 Edward P. Berglund. Brennan’s “The Seventh Incantation” ©1963 Joseph Payne Brennan. Henry Hasse’s “The Horror at Vecra” ©1988 Cryptic Publications. H.P. Lovecraft’s works ©1963, 1964, 1965 by August Derleth. Works within are quoted for purposes of illustration. 


H.P. Lovecraft 

(1890-1937) Master of Horror 



Foreword 
What has risen may sink, and what is sunk may rise… Cthulhu still lives. —H. P . Lovecraft 
My own introduction to H. P. Lovecraft was as a child, when I found a tattered book of stories, printed long before I was born. I read that book in bed that night, and became entranced forever. If you, too, love Lovecraft’s stories, you can now experience the Cthulhu Mythos in a whole new way. 
I’ve been a game designer more than 30 years, and a Lovecraft fan far longer. I’ve been an author, a college professor, and even executive producer on a movie. You’ve probably heard of some of the games I helped to create, and might even have played them. In the video game field, I’m probably best known for the strategy games I worked on. But I am most proud of how I helped create the horror roleplaying genre, as original author/developer of the Call of Cthulhu game way back in 1980. 
My other ventures have, at times, been successful. Some of the computer games I helped to develop sold millions of copies. But when I am invited to a game convention as a guest, or when a fan offers to buy me a drink, or asks for an autograph, or any of the perks that my modest fame has accumulated, it is always for Call of Cthulhu, never one of my other games. Call of Cthulhu is beloved in a way nothing else has been – and this is of course due mostly to the power of Lovecraft’s world, and Chaosium’s dedication in bringing it forth to you, my friends. 
Chaosium, through Call of Cthulhu, popularized the terrifying universe of H. P. Lovecraft in gaming and made Cthulhu a household word. Now, Chaosium has put together a team of experienced game professionals with decades of experience. In this 7th edition, Chaosium has managed once again a suc­cessful combination of roleplaying adventure with Lovecraftian horror, both of which are dear to my heart. They are, and were, the right team for this topic. 
Hardcore fans will be thrilled to hear that the new edition has lost nothing in the transition, and teems with terror, horror, and ways to introduce you and your friends to the dread world that H. P. Lovecraft and his friends constructed. 
Sandy Petersen 2014 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.
 Introduction 

An Overview of the Game Example of Play What You Need to Play 

2.
 H.P. Lovecraft and the Cthulhu Mythos 

Howard Philips Lovecraft The Cthulhu Mythos 

3.
 Creating Investigators 

Quick Reference: Investigator Generation What the Numbers Mean Sample Occupations Creating Harvey Walters Quick Reference Chart for Half and Fifth Values 

4.
 Skills 

Skill List 

5.
 Game System 

Skill Rolls Bonus and Penalty Dice Investigator Development Phase 

6.
 Combat 

The Combat Round Using Melee Weapons Fighting Maneuvers Armor Firearms Wounds and Healing Sample Poisons 

7.
 Chases 


Establishing the Chase The Chase Round 
8. Sanity 
Sanity Points and SAN Rolls Insanity Sample Phobias Samples Manias Treatment and Recovery from Insanity Getting Used to the Awfulness 
9.Magic 
Mythos Tomes Using Magic Learning a Spell Becoming a Believer 
10.
 Playing the Game 

New Keepers Non-Player Characters Rolling Dice The Idea Roll Perception Rolls Using the Rules Presenting the Terrors of the Mythos Creating Scenarios 

11.
 Tomes of Eldritch Lore 

Using Mythos Tomes The Necronomicon Mythos Tomes 

12.
 Grimoire 

Spells Deeper Magic The Grimoire 

13.
 Artifacts and Alien Devices 


14.
 Monsters, Beasts, and Alien Gods 

Chaosium Pronunciations of Mythos Names Mythos Monsters Deities of the Mythos Traditional Horrors Beasts 

15.
 Scenarios 

Amidst the Ancient Trees Crimson Letters 

16.
 References 


Glossary Converting to 7th Edition Rules Equipment - 1920s Equipment - Modern Era Weapons Table Rules Summaries Investigator Sheet - 1920s Investigator Sheet - Modern Era 
Index 



The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the light into the peace and safety of a new dark age.. 
– H.P. Lovecraft, The Call of Cthulhu 

Welcome to                Call of Cthulhu! 


all of Cthulhu is a game full of secrets, myster­ies and horror. Playing the role of a steadfast investigator, you will travel to strange and dangerous places, uncover foul plots and 

stand against the terrors of the night. You will encounter sanity-blasting entities, monsters and insane cultists. Within strange and forgotten tomes of lore you will find secrets that man was not meant to know. 
You and your companions may very well decide the fate of the world… 
Call of Cthulhu is a horror-themed roleplaying game based on the writings of Howard Phillips Lovecraft. Lovecraft penned a tremendous body of work during the 1920s and 1930s, concerning both horrors from beyond and from with­in. Following his death in 1937, Lovecraft’s stories of cosmic horror have grown in reputation and stature, and today he is recognized as a major American horror story writer of the twentieth century, influencing numerous authors and film directors, and amassing a huge following of devoted fans. Indeed, Lovecraft himself could now be considered a cult figure in his own right. Lovecraft’s fiction ranges from science fiction to gothic horror and into nihilistic cosmic terror— perfect material on which to base a roleplaying game. 
Lovecraft’s most famous invention has become known as the Cthulhu Mythos, a series of stories sharing common plot elements such as certain mythical books of arcane lore and alien godlike entities. The Cthulhu Mythos fired the imagination of other authors, mostly protégés and friends of Lovecraft, and soon they were adding to this complex mythology, further advancing its concepts and constituent parts. Today, “Cthulhu” stories are still being written (and filmed) by the heirs to Lovecraft’s literary legacy. 
An Overview of the Game 
The aim of playing Call of Cthulhu is to have fun with your friends as you explore and create a Lovecraftian story. One player takes the role of game moderator, known as the Keep­er of Arcane Lore (“Keeper” for short), and his or her role within the rules is to run the game for the rest of the players. The rest of the players take the part of intrepid Investigators of the Unknown (“investigators”), attempting to seek out, understand and eventually confront the horrors, mysteries and secrets of the Cthulhu Mythos. 
The Keeper picks a story to run. These stories are known as “scenarios”, and you will find three at the back of this book. A scenario provides the Keeper with the structure of a story for him or her to present to the players. The Keeper’s role is a little like that of a director making a film in which the actors don’t know how the story will develop. To extend that analogy, the players are like actors who have the free­dom to improvise their own scripts. 
The investigators need not be anything at all like the people who play them. Indeed, it is often more rewarding and enjoyable for players to create characters entirely unlike themselves: tough private eyes, rude taxi drivers or sinisterly genteel occultists. 
Most of the play is a verbal exchange. The Keeper sets the scene, describing the environment, the individuals and en­counters to the players. The players tell the Keeper what they intend their investigators to do. The Keeper then tells them whether they can do it and, if not, what happens instead. In play the game takes the form of a group conversation with many twists and turns and fun on the way. 
The game rules use dice to determine if an action suc­ceeds or fails when a dramatic “conflict” presents itself; for example, whether your investigators are able to leap out of the way of a giant statue that is about to crash down upon their heads! The rules describe how to decide the outcome of such conflicts. 
In Call of Cthulhu, the Keeper has the responsibility of preparing adventures (“scenarios”) and running the game without bias. It is the Keeper’s duty to make the investiga­tors’ opposition smart and mean. 
Cooperation & Competition 
Gaming is a social pastime. If you want to use your imag­ination alone, you could simply read a book. However, be warned! When a number of people get together cooperative­ly, they can build a communal fantasy far more interesting and imaginative than a single person—and the joint effort results in an extremely fun and satisfying experience for all involved. Together you create and develop a story in which each of your investigators plays a leading role! 
Whether or not investigators cooperate, the players should. Investigators may be played as nice people, as devious brutes or however the players wish. Most of the entertainment of the game can be found in the ingenuity of players’ roleplaying and in-character conversations, as well as the unforeseeably scary or amusing directions the story will take. 
Working cooperatively together, the players and Keeper build an enjoyable and understandable “world” in which to play. The rewards of cooperation are great. Remember, the object of all of this is to have fun! 
Winners and Losers 
In Call of Cthulhu, there are no winners and losers in the standard competitive sense. Play is usually cooperative. The participants work together to attain a common goal—usual­ly to discover and foil some nefarious plot being perpetrated by the minions of some dark cult or secret society. The opposition that the investigators face will often be an alien or hostile situation—controlled by an impartial Keeper, not another player. 
Winning in such a situation depends on whether the investigators succeed in their goal. Losing is what happens if they fail to achieve their goal (they may be able to try again later). During the game investigators may become injured, suffer sanity-shattering experiences, or even die! However, someone has to make a stand against the cosmic horrors of the universe and the death of a single investigator matters little if it means repulsing Cthulhu’s master plan to enslave the Earth! 

Investigators who survive will gain power from arcane volumes of forgotten lore, knowledge of horrendous monsters, and advancement in their skills as they become more experi­enced. Thus the players’ investigators will continue to progress, until their demise or retirement—whichever comes first. 
Example of Play 
If you’ve never played a roleplaying game before, you might still be wondering just how it all works. The following ex­ample of play provides an illustration of a typical gaming session. Don’t worry about some of the terms used, as you’ll become better acquainted with them as you read the rest of this book (there’s also a useful Glossary on page @@). 
This example game uses the classic 1920s setting. The investigators are trying to find out why Boss Morgan, a notorious gangland figure, has vanished. 
Paula, Joe, Cathy and Arnold are the players, each of them controlling an investigator. Garrie is in the role of Keeper and is running the game (leading the story and controlling the non-player characters and monsters in the game). Notice that while the players have different ways of referring to their characters, Garrie the Keeper easily sorts out their statements and feels no need for consistency. We join the game in mid-session… 
Investigators enter an abandoned mansion. 

(GARRIE) KEEPER: Well, guys, what’s your plan? 
PAULA: Let’s sneak around Boss Morgan’s house, looking for clues. All the investigators agree to Paula’s plan. JOE: Let’s go! I’ll drive us over in my Hupmobile. Is there 
anyone on the street? We’re leaving at midnight. (GARRIE) KEEPER: As you arrive at Morgan’s house, you 
see the street is pretty dark as two of the streetlights aren’t working. It all looks deserted. Nobody is in sight. CATHY: My private eye Jake can pick the lock on the back 
door. The players agree to the plan. PAULA: I’ll keep watch from the street ARNOLD: I’ll stay in the car for now and keep watch—my 
investigator is still very nervous. JOE: I’ll go with Cathy. (GARRIE) KEEPER: Cathy and Joe, make Listen rolls. CATHY: (rolls percentage dice) I succeeded! JOE: I failed the roll. So, Cathy, what did you hear? (GARRIE) KEEPER: You hear a creak of wood; sounds like 
the house’s front door quietly opening. Don’t forget to tick 
your Listen skill, as you got a success. CATHY: Right. (She makes a check mark on her sheet). I’m grabbing Joe and attempting to hide behind the garbage cans. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: OK, I’ll need you both to make a 
Stealth roll. JOE and CATHY: Yeah! We both rolled successes (both tick their Stealth skills). We’re well hidden behind the garbage. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Great. Since it’s night and there are no working street lamps near, you can’t see much. The form of a hulking figure leaves the house and creeps towards the street. When it reaches the middle of the street, it pulls up a manhole cover and drops down inside. You hear a splash. 
(Garrie makes a dubious liquid-sound…) 
CATHY: Did he lock the door behind him? (GARRIE) KEEPER: Not only is it not locked, it’s wide open. CATHY: I’ll sneak back and tell the others. (GARRIE) KEEPER: The rest of you, Cathy told you that 
the front door is open. JOE and PAULA together: Let’s go inside. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: What do you do, Arnold? a stairway leading up. Beneath the stairs is a closed door. 

Ahead your beam picks out some wet patches on the floor, ARNOLD: Are you kidding? My professor go in there? No 
possibly footprints. The water in the patches is dirty and way. 
stinking. 

CATHY: He can stand guard while the rest of us go inside. 
PAULA: Where do the footsteps come from and where are they going? 
ARNOLD: All alone? No way! He’s coming inside! 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: You can’t tell. Everyone try a Spot Hid­(GARRIE) KEEPER: It’s very dark and quiet inside. 
den roll. All fail to notice droplets of water on the underside of the banister. What do you want to do? 
PAULA: Joe, let me use your flashlight. I’ll take the lead. Everyone else keep their lights doused—we don’t want to be PAULA: I’m going into the study, and I intend to search it. 
seen from the street. 
JOE: I’ll search the living room. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: You are in a hallway. You can go left through an arch into the living room or right, through an 
ARNOLD: The professor checks out the hall closet. open door into what looks like a study. In front of you is 
CATHY: Jake goes upstairs. 

(GARRIE) KEEPER (Since the group has split up, the Keeper now deals individu­ally with each player): Paula, there are bookshelves in the study, but strangely only a few books. There are two un-Never Played a locked filing cabinets, a locked desk, a chair for the desk and three big leather 
Roleplaying Game Before? easy chairs. 
PAULA: I’ll open the desk first. 

If you’ve never played a roleplaying game before, you may be wondering what this is all about. To dispel some misconceptions and set you on the 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: It’s locked. If you 

right track, it may be useful to describe an average session of play (a full, 
want to pick the lock make your Lock­
blow by blow description of a game can be found nearby). 
smith roll. 

John, his partner, and two friends meet up at John’s house on Friday evening at around seven o’clock. After catching up on the week’s news PAULA: I rolled a 23—that’s under my and organizing some drinks and snacks, they sit down in John’s lounge Locksmith skill of 34—I succeed! (Paula and John hands out some paper and pencils, then talks them through ticks the skill). creating their investigators. People compare ideas for characters as they roll dice and fill out their investigator sheets. It’s now about eight o’clock. (GARRIE) KEEPER: Fine. Now, inside 
John kicks off the game by describing the opening scene, telling how the desk you find two things of interest: the investigators find themselves talking with a man who wants them a sealed envelope marked “Last Will and to check out an old property that he owns; rumor has it that it might be Testament” and a small ledger which is haunted! One of the players immediately responds to this, putting on the titled “Innsmouth Shipping Co.” Do you voice of her investigator to say that such things are, “Complete hogwash”. want to look at them now? Paula wants As the story unfolds everyone becomes involved, describing what their to very much but, to maintain tension characters are doing or saying. Dramatic conflicts arise and dice are rolled and pace, the Keeper now turns his atten­to determine the outcome. Sometimes the players get their way; other tion to Cathy. times events appear to conspire against them. It is all played out simply by 
Cathy, as Jake climbs to the top of the

talking and rolling some dice to determine the outcome of certain situa­
stairs, his hand can feel beads of water 

tions; people aren’t getting out of their chairs to act it out, neither are they 
underneath the wooden banister, as
donning costumes or using props. 
though water accumulated here after 

John and his players cease play at around ten thirty then chat for a 
something wet touched the railing. 

while before calling it a night at around eleven o’clock. Everyone is looking forward to meeting up again next week to find out how the story develops. 
CATHY: Uh-oh. Jake proceeds cautiously. 

Of course that’s just an example. The number of players and the dura­
tion of a session of play will vary from group to group. (GARRIE) KEEPER: There are two bedrooms and a bathroom on this floor. The door to the right-hand bedroom is open. There’s a musty, almost sweet smell here. 


CATHY: I peep in through the open door. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: As you enter the bedroom, the smell grows stronger and you see blood and gore everywhere. The fully clothed corpse of Boss Morgan is draped over the bed. The top of his head has been torn off and the insides crudely scooped out. You can see all this because a faint green phos­phorescence has been traipsed over most of the room. Please make a Sanity roll for Jake. 
CATHY: Oops, I failed. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Okay, Jake loses 1D6 Sanity. Garrie rolls a 4 on a 1D6. Jake loses 4 Sanity points—he turns green, utters a scream and then throws up at the gruesome sight. The rest of you hear Jake scream from upstairs. 
ALL: We rush to aid him. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: OK. Each of you make a Sanity roll as you enter the room and see the terrible scene. They do, with various results. 
CATHY: After Jake has regained control of himself, he finds a bathroom and wipes off his trench coat. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: What are the rest of you going to do? 
JOE: I want to inspect the body closely, but without touch­ing it. Also, I’m warning the others not to step in the blood. 
PAULA: I’m searching the other rooms up here. 
ARNOLD: The professor comes with you. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Joe, you can see more of the filthy water splashed over the corpse. Some of it is even inside his brainpan. There are some abrasions on what is left of his face. Try a Spot Hidden roll. 
JOE: I succeeded. Now what? 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Seven feet up the wall is a bloody, watery handprint. Claw marks are visible, and the print is at least eight inches across the palm, though the fingers are quite stubby. It’s not smeared at all and you can make out the lines of the palm in the print. 
JOE: Wow! I’m hissing for Paula, Jake and the professor to get in here. Does he have his camera with him, Arnold? 
ARNOLD: Dang it! I knew the professor forgot something! Uh, he presses a sheet of paper from a notebook against the print for a copy. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: He gets the print. Arnold, your profes­sor also notices strange symbols on the opposite wall. As he studies them, they seem to move, swirling hypnotically. 
ARNOLD: Oho! He wants a closer look. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: He doesn’t have the time. Everyone, try Listen rolls for your investigators. Joe, Arnold, and Cathy 

"Uh-oh. Jake proceeds cautiously." fail. Paula succeeds. Paula, you hear a clanging noise from the street outside. The rest of you hear nothing. 
PAULA: I wonder what that could be? I hope it’s not the manhole cover banging down! 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: The front door suddenly slams closed and you can hear someone stomping in and up the stairs! 
The Keeper stomps on the floor and hunches his shoulders for effect. 
ARNOLD: My professor is waiting by the window—ready to jump out! 
PAULA: I’m shining my light out the bedroom door, trying to see what’s coming. 
CATHY: Jake pulls out his .38 snub-nose revolver and looks over Paula’s shoulder. 
JOE: I’m cowering behind Jake and Paula but I’m getting out my trench knife, just in case. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Shuffling into the room is a ghastly parody of a man. It stands almost eight feet tall, with de­formed, twisted extremities. Its face is a mass of wrinkles. No features are visible. Its sickly brown-green skin is loose and strips of decaying flesh flap from its limbs. It drips the same filthy brown water you’ve seen earlier. You must make Sanity rolls. If you succeed you lose 1 point, if you fail it’s going to be 1D10 points! 
JOE: I made my roll successfully. 
ARNOLD: Hooray! I made mine too. 

Read Me—how to use this book 
This book contains everything that you need to play Call of Cthulhu—except for dice, pencils and note­paper. A wealth of support material for this game exists, including short, quick-play scenarios, world­encompassing campaigns played across many gaming sessions, setting books, online forums and so on. 
Before you run this game for the first time, you should become familiar with the rules and concepts of Call of Cthulhu. This rulebook is divided into a number of key sections. 
The Call of Cthulhu—the original story by H.P. Lovecraft that started it all. It is recommended that you read this to get a feel of the setting and atmosphere. 
The Rules Section—everything that you need to know to play the game, including creating investiga­tors, the game’s rules and tips on how to get the most from Call of Cthulhu. 
Keeper’s Reference Section—this is only for those who (i.e. the Keeper) intend to run games of Call of Cthulhu. Call of Cthulhu is a game about mysteries and secrets, and reading these pages of reference may spoil your enjoyment if you’re not planning on being the Keeper of Arcane Lore. 
If you are new to Call of Cthulhu we recommend you read this Introduction all the way through (espe­cially the Example of Play on pages @@—@@), followed by the Call of Cthulhu story by Lovecraft (page @@). Next, read through the rules. In addition to this, if you plan to run the game yourself, you should also read Chapter 10: Playing the Game and familiarize yourself with the rest of the Keeper’s Reference Section (pages @@—@@). Finally, choose one of the scenarios from the back of this book (The Haunting is a good choice). You will then be ready to run your first game! 
However, if you are already familiar with H.P. Lovecraft and previous versions of the Call of Cthulhu game, you will probably want to jump straight in to Chapter 3: Creating Investigators and become familiar with the rules of this new edition. 


CATHY: I blew it. (Garrie rolls the Sanity loss, getting 
3) Jake lost 3 Sanity points! 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Paula also fails the roll. Garrie rolls Sanity loss for Paula’s investigator, getting 9. Paula, your investigator is really shocked by the hor­ror in front of him. Lose 9 points of Sanity. 
PAULA: Uh-oh! I’m really scared! 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Let’s see. He examines her investigator’s sheet. Paula, your investigator could be temporarily insane, since you’ve lost over 5 Sanity points. Unless you roll higher than his Intelligence on 1D100, it’s all going to be too much for him to take and he’ll faint. Paula rolls a 04 and her investi­gator faints. 
(GARRIE) KEEPER: Since Paula’s investigator was holding the flashlight; it’s now rolling on the floor, flashing wildly about the room. Arnold’s professor has realized that the windows are barred with iron gratings. The only way outside seems to be past the Thing. 
ALL (in confusion): I’m trying to pound open the bars with a chair! Where’s my flashlight? Does any­one know what this thing is? I’m shooting at its face. Help! Help! 
Do the grills on the windows unlock and swing back? What do the symbols on the wall represent? Does the monster attack? Did Paula’s investigator remember to take the ledger and legal documents he found? Does Jake’s .38 revolver affect the monster? 
What This Game Covers 
Likewise are there dread survivals of things older and more potent than man; things that have blas­phemously straggled down through the aeons to ages never meant for them; monstrous entities that have lain sleeping endlessly in incredible crypts and remote caverns, outside the laws of reason and causation, and ready to be waked by such blasphemers as shall know their dark forbidden signs and furtive passwords. 
—H.P. Lovecraft and William Lumley, The Diary of 
Alonzo Typer 

The Cthulhu Mythos as originated by Lovecraft de­fines this game; however, certain interesting concepts and creations by some of Lovecraft’s contemporaries and beyond have also been used to ensure that the full horrors of the Mythos can be utilized. 
Many Call of Cthulhu scenarios are set in the United States in the 1920s—called the Classic Era—in which most of Lovecraft’s tales were set. To Lovecraft the 1920s were modern-day, and so this book uses both the Classic Era and our own Modern-day as period settings. Many supplements and published scenarios exist for different eras, including Gaslight Victorian and the Dark Ages. Set your games when you wish. If so desired, a Keeper may change the period to a more modern date or a more ancient one. The Cthulhu Mythos transcends all time and space, and the unfathomable machinations of the Old Ones could spill into any conceivable setting or historical period. 
This New Edition 
Call of Cthulhu was originally published in 1981 and has been consistently available and supported by Chaosium since then. This book, the seventh edition, has been fully revised and sees some significant changes, while remaining compatible with previous editions. Advice for using previ­ously published material is provided in the section Convert­ing to 7th Edition on page @@. 
Notice to Keepers 
It is recommended that anyone hoping to run a game of Call of Cthulhu becomes familiar with the works of H.P. Lovecraft. By reading Lovecraft’s stories, you will not only learn a lot about the Cthulhu Mythos, you will also begin to understand some of the key horror themes that are used in this game. You can read anything written by him, but the following works are the heart of the Mythos and will make a good start: 
T The Lurking Fear 
T The Horror at Red Hook 
T The Colour Out of Space 
T The Dunwich Horror 
T The Shadow Over Innsmouth 
T The Dreams in the Witch-House 
T The Haunter of the Dark 
T The Shunned House 
T The Call of Cthulhu 
T The Case of Charles Dexter Ward 
T The Whisperer in Darkness 
T At the Mountains of Madness 
T The Shadow Out of Time 
A Keeper who reads at least half of the above works, which are mostly novelettes, will be in good shape to run this game. Potential players of the game are encouraged to read at least one story before trying to investigate any of the mysteries of the Mythos. 

What You Need to Play 
When you are ready to begin playing Call of Cthulhu, you only need a few things to start: 
G This rulebook. 
G Roleplaying dice. 
G Paper. 
G Pencils and an eraser. 
G Two or more people to game with. 
G A quiet place (the kitchen table is a good place to start). 
G Three or four hours in which to play the game. 

Roleplaying Dice 
As mentioned, to play this game the Keeper and players will need a set of roleplaying dice, including percentile dice (D100), a four-sided die (D4), a six-sided die (D6), an eight­sided die (D8), and a twenty-sided die (D20). Ideally, to keep things moving along, players and Keeper should each have their own set of dice. 
People new to roleplaying may never have seen dice with more than six sides. A variety of them can be found at most hobby game stores and online—probably including the place where you bought this book. 
The letter D stands for the word “die” or “dice”. The number after the D stands for the range of random numbers sought: D8 generates the random numbers 1 through 8, for instance, while D100 generates the numbers 1–100. 
The dice are used to indicate how many hit points were lost to an attack, to generate investigators, to determine san­ity loss, etc. 
Reading the D100 (Percentile Dice) 
Percentile dice (to which the abbreviation D100 refers) usually consist of two 10-sided dice rolled at the same time. These dice are sold as a pair, one (units die) being numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, the other (tens die) being numbered 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 00. When rolled, read the top numbers on the dice to get the result. The single digit is the units, the double digit the tens, and you should read them together. A roll of 00 on the tens die combined with a 0 on the units die indicates a result of 100. A roll of 00 on the tens die combined with any other roll on the units die indicates a roll of under 10; for example, a roll of 00 on the tens die and 3 on the units die being read as 3%. 
Alternatively use two “units” dice of different colors, each numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0. Read the die of one color consistently as the tens-digit and the other as the units-digit: thus a result of 2 and 3 reads as 23, a result of 0 and 1 reads as 1, and a result of 1 and 0 reads as 10. A result of 0 and 0 reads as 100. 
18 
Dice Roll Variations 
Sometimes a dice notation in the rules or in a scenario is preceded by a number; it tells the reader that more than one such die should be rolled and that their results should be added together. For instance, 2D6 means that two 6-sided dice should be rolled and totalled (or roll a D6 twice and add the scores together). 
Sometimes additions are shown to die rolls. You might see 1D6+1, for instance. This means that the number fol­lowing the plus sign should be added to the result of the D6 roll. For 1D6+1, the result must be 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7. 
A notation may require that different dice be rolled at one time. If a monster claws for 1D6+1+2D4 damage, find the power of the actual attack by rolling the three requested dice, totalling the results, and adding one (thus, rolling 1D6 and 2D4 [1D4 and another 1D4] and adding 1 to the total rolled). The notation “damage bonus” or “DB” appended to attack damage reminds and players to add the monster’s or investigator’s “damage bonus” to the dice rolled. 


The Investigator Sheet 
Players should record the details of their investigators on investigator sheets, found near the back of this book (page @@) and ready to photocopy (investigator sheets are also available for free download at www.chaosium.com). There are versions for the 1920s and Modern Day games. The investigator sheet holds all the information needed for investigators to tackle mysteries. The next chapter explains how to fill out this sheet. 
Figures and Other Paraphernalia 
Call of Cthulhu can be played verbally, without miniature figures or paraphernalia other than dice and investigator sheets. You may find, however, that miniatures, tokens or markers help you to visualise the action, denoting where each investigator is positioned during a combat scene or determining who’s at the front when searching through ancient catacombs and the like. Whether or not models are used, players usually find it helpful if the Keeper sketches out the area of activity or the encounter on a sheet of graph or plain paper. 
Likewise, some gaming groups like to use props in their games, such as statuettes, letters, books or even clay tablets. Such items, if prepared with care, can lend drama and atmosphere to a game. However, they can also end up looking silly if they are poorly presented. Some players can­not believe that a polystyrene block is anything other than a polystyrene block; even through the Keeper has spent hours carving it to resemble the “Black Obelisk of Thantos”! The best way to decide if props will work with your group is to talk about it and agree whether you all feel they are worth the time and effort required. 


West of Arkham the hills rise wild, and there are valleys with deep woods that no axe has ever cut. There are dark narrow glens where the trees slope fantastically, and where thin brooklets trickle without ever having caught the glint of sunlight. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Colour Out Of Space 

Howard Philips Lovecraft 


n a 46-year lifetime, H.P. Lovecraft (HPL) wrote or collaborated on more than 65 stories, penned dozens of articles and essays, hun­dreds of poems, and wrote perhaps as many as 

100,000 letters. Despite never finding critical and commercial success in his lifetime, Lovecraft’s legacy and contribution to modern horror story telling cannot be overstated. His works now reach millions around the world and his creations, particularly Cthulhu and the Necronom­icon, have become well known horror icons for a legion of devoted fans. Today, Lovecraft is recognized as making a significant contribution to American literature and as being one of the foremost horror writers of the Twentieth Century. 
His Life and the Creation of the Cthulhu Mythos 
Although chronic nervous disorders prevented Lovecraft from regular attendance at school, he was a precocious child and an avid reader. As his father was institutionalized when Lovecraft was only three, he and his mother moved into the house owned by his maternal grandfather. It was in the library of Grandfather Whipple that Lovecraft first discovered the Arabian Nights, the myths of Greece and Rome, and Edgar Alan Poe. He wrote his first story, "The Little Glass Bottle", at the age of six, about the time he had his first dreams about the terrible, faceless night­gaunts (throughout his life he had vivid dreams). It was also through this library that Lovecraft developed a taste for Georgian thought and literature that would remain with him throughout his life. Lovecraft, who would later describe himself as a “mechanist materialist”, was also attracted to the sciences. In 1899 he began publishing a small journal called the Scientific Gazette, followed shortly thereafter by the Rhode Island Journal of Astronomy. These small, hectographed publications were sold door to door by a bicycle-mounted HPL. At age thirteen, Lovecraft’s beloved grandfather died. His father had already passed away, succumbing to his illness in 1898, still confined to Butler Hospital. A series of business failures had depleted the Whipple family fortune, forcing Lovecraft’s mother and aunts to sell the family home and move to smaller quarters. This was a great blow to Lovecraft. 
Another attack of nerves led to his withdrawal from high school in 1905 and again in 1908. Lovecraft, two and a half years short of graduation, never returned. Lovecraft never held a job, supporting himself on the dwindling fam­ily fortune and by what little he could earn as a ghostwriter and revisionist. Always the aristocrat, he was throughout his life to remain torn between the professional writer’s desire for success and money and the detached, amateur gentleman’s desire to reach for aesthetic goals unfettered by commercial demands. Despite this, his first attempts to sell his fiction met with unqualified success, with the editor of Weird Tales, Edwin Baird, accepting the first five stories sent to him by Lovecraft. His stories appeared in nine of eleven issues published between late 1923 and early 1925. When the editorship of Weird Tales passed to the hands of Farnsworth Wright, Lovecraft’s fortunes changed. Wright, an able editor, possessed a blind spot regarding Lovecraft’s work and now HPL more often met with rejection than success. Stories now considered classics, such as "The Call of Cthulhu", were only published after meeting repeated rejections from Weird Tales. His half-hearted attempts to provide what Wright demanded of commercial fiction were only partially successful. Wright rejected both "At the Mountains of Madness" and "The Shadow Out of Time", now-famous stories that were eventually printed by As­tounding Stories. The superb "The Case of Charles Dexter Ward" didn’t see publication until years after Lovecraft’s death. Crushed by the repeated rejections, Lovecraft began refusing to submit his stories, and "Dreams in the Witch House" only saw print because a friend (August Derleth) secretly submitted it to Wright, urging him to accept it. 
Ironically, it was during this time that HPL was doing the bulk of his professionally published revision work, much of it no less than actual ghostwriting. Lovecraft might provide a nearly complete text of a story based on a few root ideas supplied by the “author”. Stories such as Zealia Bishop’s “The Curse of Yig” and Hazel Heald’s “The Horror in the Museum” were in fact 90% or more the product of HPL. While these stories were quickly ac­cepted by Wright, Lovecraft’s work under his own name continued to be rejected. 
Although he attracted a small core of avid fans—many of them writers themselves—he never achieved more than semi-regular publication in the pulp magazines of the day. Never as popular as writers like Seabury Quinn, Lovecraft earned most of his meager income revising and rewriting the works of others, even ghostwriting “Under the Pyramids” (1924) for escape artist Harry Houdini. It was through publication in amateur magazines, and later in Weird Tales, that Lovecraft was to come into contact with other authors of the macabre tale. 
Lovecraft was a prodigious letter writer; he regularly corresponded with other fiction writers, including Robert 
E.Howard (creator of Conan the Barbarian), Clark Ashton Smith (creator of Averoigne and Zothique) and Robert Bloch (later to write Psycho). HPL’s fictional worlds and histories were often discussed, as were the worlds created by Smith and other writers. It was not long before Smith and Lovecraft carried over this sharing of ideas into their fiction, referring to each other’s creations in their stories. It was Smith who gave birth to such deities as Tsathoggua, Atlach-Nacha and Abhoth, and who created the magical tome, the Book of Eibon. It was Smith’s magical, prehis­toric Hyperborea that Lovecraft frequently referred to in his tales. This idea was soon picked up by other authors. Robert E. Howard created the dreaded Unaussprechlichen 

The Master of American Horror, H.P. Lovecraft Kulten and the mad poet Justin Geoffrey, author of the ter­rible People of the Monolith. These were also incorporated into Lovecraft’s stories, along with references to Howard’s prehistoric Cimmeria. The young Robert Bloch provided the blasphemous books De Vermiis Mysteriis and the Cultes des Goules, as well as the interstellar and invisible star vampire that devoured a thinly disguised HPL in Bloch’s “Shambler from the Stars” (1935). Bloch’s creations were quickly absorbed by Lovecraft, who also revenged his “murder” by dispatching protagonist Robert Blake in the “The Haunter of the Dark” (1936). Long-time friend Frank Belknap Long brought to the collection both the hounds of Tindalos and Chaugnar Faugn, who appeared in “The Horror in the Hills”, a story by Long based on one of Lovecraft’s many vivid dreams. August Derleth added the most to the now-growing collection of Great Old Ones and alien races. Continuing to write new Cthulhu Mythos stories long after Lovecraft’s death in 1937, he created, among others, Cthugha, the Tcho-Tcho people, Ithaqua, and the sand-dwellers. Basing a number of his tales in Lovecraft’s fictional towns of Arkham, Dunwich, Innsmouth, and Kingsport, he also introduced such characters as Dr. Laban Shrewsbury. Al­though many disagree with Derleth’s interpretations—his desire to create a pantheon of good gods based on Love­craft’s Nodens, and his attempts to define Cthulhu and Nyarlathotep as elementals—none will deny this man’s tireless efforts in keeping the works of Lovecraft in print and available to the public in the decades following HPL’s death by founding Arkham House Publishing. One of Derleth’s favorite additions to the Mythos was Hastur, a great being supposedly trapped beneath the Lake of Hali near the city Carcosa on a planet circling the star Al­

debaran. Although briefly mentioned by Lovecraft in early tales, these were actually the creations of Ambrose Bierce (1842-1914?), American journalist and early exponent of the weird tale. Bierce was an early influence on HPL, as were a number of other writers. His favorite author was always Edgar Allan Poe (1809- 1849), and Poe’s influence can be clearly seen in some of Lovecraft’s first adult fiction. “The Outsider” (1921) perhaps most closely emulates Poe’s style and subject matter. Arthur Machen (1863-1947) was another early influence; his story “The Great God Pan” (1894) is very similar in theme to Lovecraft’s “The Dunwich Horror”. Robert W. Chambers (1865-1933) also left his mark on Lovecraft. A mysterious play, The King in Yellow, figures in some of Chambers’ stories and probably inspired Lovecraft to create the Necronomicon, the Pnakotic Manuscripts and the other tomes of eldritch lore for which his tales are famous. It was Chambers who first borrowed from Bierce the Lake of Hali and Carcosa, perhaps inspir­ing Lovecraft to attempt transpositions. 
Lord Dunsany (1878-1957) was probably Lovecraft’s strongest contemporary influence. It was Dunsany’s The Gods of Pegana (1905) that encouraged Lovecraft to write several dream-based stories and first provided him with the idea of an artificial pantheon of gods. Algernon Black­wood, another contemporary admired by HPL, drew upon Native American legends for the version of the Wendigo later adapted into the Mythos by August Derleth, which is there called Ithaqua. 
Before Lovecraft’s death, this circle of correspondents would include such recognizable names as Henry Kuttner, 
C.L. Moore, J. Vernon Shea, E. Hoffman Price, and Fritz Leiber. Some of these letters are collected in five Arkham House volumes, while others are published by Necronom­icon Press. Brown University, in Lovecraft’s hometown of Providence, Rhode Island, maintains a catalogued Love­craft collection with thousands more. 
It was not until late in Lovecraft’s career—and then probably only at the urging of some of his younger corre­spondents—that he began to integrate into his later stories some of the creations found in his earliest tales. In “The Shadow over Innsmouth” (1931) we find the deep one hybrids worshiping Dagon, a creature not mentioned since the story “Dagon” (1917), his second piece of adult fiction. Similarly, the fictional city of Arkham and its Miskatonic University, first used as backdrops in “The Picture in the House” (1920) and "Herbert West—Reanimator" (1921­1922), are finally developed in his later stories, beginning with “The Dunwich Horror” (1928) and continuing through to “The Thing on the Doorstep” (1933). "At the Mountains of Madness" (1931) and “The Shadow Out of Time” (1934-1935) contain detailed histories of pre-hu­man Earth, describing the different alien beings that had in the past visited and colonized the planet. Some of these races, such as the fungi from Yuggoth and the Cthulhu spawn, were from earlier stories and were carefully inte­grated into these late-devised histories. 
The dreaded Necronomicon, one of the Lovecraft’s most famous creations, undergoes a gradual evolution. First mentioned in “The Hound” (1922), it is here attributed to an Abdul Alhazred, an Arab poet mentioned in an earlier story, “The Nameless City” (1921). Alhazred was, in fact, the boyhood persona of a five-year-old HPL, his youthful imagination inflamed by his grandfather’s copy of A Thousand and One Arabian Nights. 
Lovecraft died in near obscurity in March of 1937, at the age of 46, a victim of Bright’s disease and virulent cancer. His mother had died in 1921 after two years’ confinement in the same institution where his father had died. A brief, two-year marriage accompanied by residence in New York proved disastrous, though divorce was never made final, and in 1926 Lovecraft had returned home to Providence to live out his years a bachelor, shar­ing quarters with two aunts. 
These last years saw a reduced output of fiction, but it was during this period that he produced some of his most memorable tales. He also found time to travel, visiting places that tickled his antiquarian heart: Maine, Philadelphia, Quebec, St. Augustine, Charlotte, New Or­leans, Salem, and Nantucket. Traveling by bus, sleeping in YMCAs, eating crackers, cheese and canned beans, Lovecraft was able to indulge his personal tastes for trav­el, history and antiquity. 
Plenty of evidence exists to show that Lovecraft was, by any assessment, an odd individual. Predisposed to hypochondria and a premature pose of old age, for much of his life he was committed to social and artistic views more suitable to centuries past than the one he lived in. Allergic to cold and repulsed by seafood, he was also a scientist and a philosopher possessed of an inquiring mind and sharp wit. Most who came to know him during his lifetime were left profoundly changed by his friendship. Encouraged and enlightened by his erudition and no-nonsense philosophies, many went on to achieve fame far greater than their mentor ever enjoyed during his lifetime. He has the same effect today, generations after his death. His name is better known than ever and those who discover him, whether through his stories, through films, games, comics, or trading cards, find themselves as fascinated by his bizarre creations and nightmare worlds as were his contemporaries so many years ago. 
After Lovecraft 
The 1940s and ‘50s saw a quiet expansion of the Mythos. Robert Bloch and James Wade added a few stories to the canon; however, it was August Derleth who contributed the most, producing a number of original tales as well as posthumous collaborations based on Lovecraft’s story notes. Derleth also established Arkham House with Don­ald Wandrei, a publishing business created to ensure that Lovecraft’s stories would not be forgotten. 
It was not until 1964 that the appearance of a young British writer named Ramsey Campbell heralded a re­newed interest in the Cthulhu Mythos. Encouraged by August Derleth, Campbell’s first published collection, The Inhabitant of the Lake and Other Less Welcome Tenants 

Terminology 

Occasionally referring to his Cthulhu and Yog-Sothoth cycles, to the best of anyone’s knowledge Lovecraft never used the term Cthulhu Mythos. Although nearly all his tales can be linked by common references to people, places, and things, for the most part they lack a true central structure or anything resembling a pre­conceived history and mythology. 
The term Cthulhu Mythos is generally attributed to August Derleth. Fans and scholars have since debated the definition of this term, argued the Cthulhu Mythos content of various of Lovecraft’s tales, constructed ex­perimental pantheons of gods and deities, postulated histories, and made vain attempts to explain all the facets of the literary Mythos. 
In the meantime dozens, perhaps hundreds, of writers both professional and amateur have continued to write Mythos-inspired stories expanding upon Lovecraft’s original concepts while simultaneously developing their own, sometimes inconsistent with HPL and rarely consistent with each other. For the purposes of Call of Cthulhu, Chaosium has incorporated most of Lovecraft’s creations, as well as those of other authors, in a loosely cast Mythos that allows Keepers to add or delete particular creatures and conceptions as they will. 

(1964), was a series of Lovecraft-inspired pastiches set in England’s Severn Valley. These stories described a number of different beings, races, and histories similar to, but dis­tinct from Lovecraft’s. His most famous Mythos creations include Y’golonac, Gla'aki, the insects from Shagghai, and a host of other creatures and god-like beings. 1971 saw the emergence of Brian Lumley, another Englishman who brought to the Mythos the underground chthonians, the mysterious G’harne Fragments, and the modern-day sor­cerer Titus Crow. 
Numerous other authors directly influenced by Love­craft include Gary Myers, Basil Copper, T.E.D. Klein, David Drake and Thomas Ligotti, as well as contemporaries such as W.H. Pugmire, Joseph Pulver and Laird Barron. Many others, such as Stephen King, have made special contri­butions to anthologies of new Mythos tales. Few writers of modern horror fiction can claim there is no Lovecraft influence in their work. 
Lovecraftian inspired tales have also stretched their tentacles out of print and into celluloid. Today, numerous feature and short films have been made based upon HPL’s stories. Notably, Stuart Gordon’s Re-Animator (a modern telling of "Herbert West—Reanimator") and Dagon (a con­temporary reworking of “The Shadow Over Innsmouth”) have helped bring HPL to mainstream cinema. Directors including John Carpenter, Frank Darabont, Guillermo del Toro, and Sam Raimi have all incorporated Lovecraftian themes and references within their work. 
The Cthulhu Mythos 
It is a mistake to fancy that horror is associated inextricably with darkness, silence, and solitude. —H. P. Lovecraft, Cool Air 
Lovecraft once wrote, “All my tales are based upon the fundamental premise that common human laws and inter­ests and emotions have no va­lidity or significance in the vast cosmos at-large.” He further imagined that the funda­mental truths of the universe were so alien and horrifying that mere exposure to them might result in madness or suicide. While humanity might crave both com­fort and the truth, only one or the other was possi­ble. The human mind is an in­flexible container. It cannot maintain cosmic truth and complete sanity—more of one poured in must spill out more of the other. Humans desperate for the power cloaked within truth might choose to forgo all remnants of sanity in exchange for becoming adept at manipulating the secrets of time and space. Their devil’s bargains made, these merciless sorcerers would whistle down devastation and doom to this world in new exchange for yet more knowledge and power. 
Lovecraft’s working-out of these ideas in his fiction became known as the Cthulhu Mythos. The term encom­passes a complex and broad group of sometimes contra­dictory narratives, stories, essays, letters, and deductions, so extensive as to be impossible to summarize in detail— and not the least because new Mythos material continues to be written around the world. Adding to the confusion, one of his perceptions was that the truly alien is genuinely unknowable. The Mythos becomes not just mysterious, but protean and contradictory; not only do we not know it, we never can know it. As it transpires, we have only our own names for most of these things. We do not even know their “real” names for themselves, or if they have names. 

A General Summary 
Though their interrelations are obscure, we know that some entities of the Cthulhu Mythos are clearly superior or inferior in their powers. Gods are the mightiest, followed (at some distance, apparently) by the Great Old Ones. 
Depending on which author one reads, the universe is ruled by beings variously known as the Elder Gods, Outer Gods or Other Gods. Only a few of these deities are known by name. The majority are both blind and idiotic in human terms. They are all extremely powerful alien beings and some may be of extra-cosmic origin. The Outer Gods rule the universe and have little to do with humanity, except for Nyarlathotep. Humans med­dling with these entities suffer for it, usually ending in madness or death. Names for a few Outer Gods are known. They appear almost to be true gods, as opposed to the alien horror of the Great Old Ones, and some may personify some cos­mic principle. Only a few of these deities seem to take interest in human affairs or to acknowledge the existence of the human race. When they do, they often are shown trying to 
break through cosmic walls or dimensions to wreak new destruction. All the races and lesser deities of the Mythos acknowledge the Outer Gods and many wor­ship them. 
The Outer Gods are controlled to some extent by their messenger and soul, Nyarlathotep. When the Outer Gods are discomforted, Nyarlathotep investigates. Azathoth, the daemon sultan and ruler of the cosmos, writhes mindlessly to the piping of a demon flute at the center of the universe. Yog-Sothoth, either a second-in-command or co-ruler, is coterminous with all time and space, but locked somehow outside the mundane universe. Yog-Sothoth can be sum­moned to this side only through the use of mighty spells, whereas Azathoth theoretically might be met by traveling far enough through space. A group of Outer Gods and bizarre beings dance slowly around Azathoth, but none are named. 
The term Elder Gods sometimes refers to another race of gods, neutral to and possibly rivals of the Outer Gods. The Elder Gods, if they exist, do not seem to be as dangerous to humanity as Azathoth and its ilk, but they have even less contact with humanity. Nodens is the best­known Elder God. 
Outer and Elder Gods sometimes have been lumped together and confusingly called the Other Gods, though primarily gods of the outer planets and not of our Earth. They would seem seldom called here, however when they do appear they are second to nothing in horror. (And, just to thoroughly confuse you, a set of minor Outer Gods are known collectively as the Lesser Other Gods!) Species associated with these deities (shantaks, hunting horrors, servitors of the Outer Gods, dark young of Shub-Niggu­rath) are correspondingly rare on Earth. 
The Great Old Ones are not as supernatural as the Outer Gods, but are nonetheless god-like and terrible to human eyes. Humans are much more likely to worship Great Old Ones, who are comparatively near at hand and who occasionally participate in human affairs or contact individual humans, than they are to worship Outer Gods. Entire clans or cults may secretly worship a Great Old One. Lone madmen, on the other hand, seem to prefer the Outer Gods. Beings serving the Great Old Ones frequently inhabit the remote fastness of the Earth. Investigators most often encounter their worshipers and alien servants. 
The Great Old Ones themselves appear to be immensely powerful alien beings with supernatural-seeming abilities, but not to be true gods in the sense that the Outer Gods are reported. Each Great Old One is independent of the rest and many seem to be temporarily imprisoned in some way. It is said that, “When the stars are right,” the Great Old Ones can plunge from world to world. When the stars are not right, they cannot live. “Cannot live” need not mean death, as the famous couplet from the Necronomicon suggests: 
That is not dead which can eternal lie, And with strange aeons even death may die. 
Cthulhu, the most famous creation of Lovecraft, is a Great Old One. With the rest of his race, he sleeps in a vast tomb at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean. Cthulhu seems to be the most important Great Old One on Earth. Others of differing forms exist and they are recorded as being both less powerful and more free. Ithaqua the Wind­walker roams at will across Earth’s arctic latitudes. Hastur the Unspeakable dwells near Aldebaran and Cthugha near Fomalhaut. Other Great Old Ones doubtless infest other worlds and it may be common for a world to be ruled by dominant Great Old Ones. All those known on Earth are invoked or worshiped by humans but, by the evidence of the stories, Cthulhu is worshiped more than the rest put together. Minor Great Old Ones such as Quachil Uttaus 

What was left out 
The original designer, Sandy Petersen, took the deci­sion to ignore a portion of the Mythos that did not appeal to him and which he felt was not in Lovecraft’s original concept. He left out the “war in heaven” in which the Great Old Ones battled and were defeated by the Elder Gods, supposed deities of good opposed to the cosmic evil of the Great Old Ones. This idea of a cosmic war is never found in Lovecraft’s own works; more alarmingly, it vitiates some of the stark horror found in the original ideas. Carrying Elder Signs around like crucifixes and holy water and always having the white-hat Elder Gods in the background, ready to save one’s bacon if things get too bad, greatly weakens the original horror of the bleak uncaring universe, to which mankind is left naked and defenseless. He also left out the concept of the various Great Old Ones being somehow connected to the Greek elements of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air (exemplified by Nyarlathotep, Cthulhu, Cthugha, and Hastur, respectively). This idea falls apart under close inspection (if Cthulhu is a water god, why is he currently dead due to being under the sea?), and weakens the premise of the Great Old Ones being monstrous alien beings. 
In addition, for this current edition, the designers have omitted classifying Mythos races into the divi­sions of Servitor and Independent (greater and lesser varieties). Such classifications tend to diminish the alien quality of these beings, stripping away some of the unknowable quality which HPL bequeathed upon them. The organization, hierarchy and allegiances of Mythos races should be mysterious, inhuman and confounding. 
Naturally, if these conceptions seem good and well done to the Keeper, use them at will. Call of Cthulhu is your game. 

usually have no worshipers, but wizards may know spells to summon them. Interventions by Great Old Ones in human affairs are isolated. Some commentators suspect that these greater beings rarely think about human beings or take them into account. Humanity is negligible and unimportant. 
Certain Mythos species are often associated with partic­ular Great Old Ones or Outer Gods—byakhee with Hastur, for instance, or nightgaunts with Nodens. Frequently a god or Great Old One manifests accompanied by several such beings. Representatives may act as hit men, messengers, spies and delivery boys, frightening off investigators and bulking out confrontations. In comparison, Outer Gods and Great Old Ones should be met with infrequency. 
Other alien species are also important, and sometimes have been able to hold their own against Great Old Ones. Such beings vary in power and some are now extinct. They are intimately connected with our planet, as described in At the Mountains of Madness and “The Shadow Out of Time”. In these stories Lovecraft gives the true history of the Earth. Some species, such as dholes or flying polyps, make no association with particular gods or else, as with elder things and the Great Race, take no special interest in magic. 
At the dawn of the Cambrian age, beings known only as the elder things flew to the Earth. They inhabited much of the land, warred with other species, and finally were pushed back to Antarctica. The elder things, perhaps mis­takenly, bred organisms eventually to evolve into the dino­saurs, mammals and humanity. They also bred the horrible shoggoths, whose ultimate revolt led to the near-extinction of the elder things. 
Eons ago, indigenous cone-shaped beings had their minds taken over by the Great Race of Yith, mental beings from the stars. The Great Race survived in their adopted bodies until about 50 million years ago, when they were de­feated by terrible flying polyps not native to this Earth, which the Great Race had imprisoned in vast caverns beneath the surface. However, the Great Race had already transmitted their minds forward in time to escape their doom. 

The star-spawn of Cthulhu came down upon the Earth and conquered a vast reach of land in the primordial Pacific Ocean, but were trapped when it sank beneath the surface. The beings referred to as the fungi from Yuggoth (or mi-go) established their first bases on the Earth in the Jurassic period, about a hundred million years ago. They gradually reduced their bases to the tops of certain moun­tains, where they maintain mining colonies and such. 
Dozens of other races also participated in this antedi­luvian parade, such as the serpent people who built cities and a civilization in the Permian, before the dinosaurs had evolved, and a winged race that succeeded the Great Race of Yith. Even species from Earth’s future are mentioned, such as the beetle-like organisms that one day will succeed man, and the intelligent arachnids that are prophesied to be the last intelligent life on Earth, billions of years hence. At present, humans share the planet with deep ones and ghouls (which seem related to humanity in some fashion), and with a handful of mi-go. Other species occasionally visit Earth or are sleeping, or are dormant. 

Great Cthulhu will rise when the Stars Are Right! 

Most demoniacal of all shocks is that of the abysmally unexpected and grotesquely unbelievable. Nothing I had before undergone could compare in terror with what I now saw; with the bizarre marvels that sight implied. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Outsider 


About This Chapter 
n Call of Cthulhu, each player takes the role of an investigator, someone whose mission is to unearth hidden secrets, discover forgotten places and, armed with knowledge which man was not meant to know, stand against the 

bloodcurdling horrors of the Cthulhu Mythos. 
Working as a team, investigators can come from dis­parate backgrounds and be of varied occupations—each bringing certain expertise to the group. Together, joined in comradeship and common purpose, you will stand steadfast against the coming darkness… 
This chapter provides the rules for creating investigator player characters. At the end of this chapter you’ll also find some alternative methods for creating investigators, as well as a two-page spread that provides a handy summary for quick reference. 
Creating Your Investigator 
There is more than one approach to creating an investigator. Some people prefer to have an idea about the type of in­vestigator they wish to create before rolling any dice, whilst others prefer to let the dice rolls guide their choices. What follows are the standard rules for creating investigators, with further options at the end of this chapter. More guidance is provided in Chapter 10: Playing the Game. 
The Steps 
Here are the five steps to creating an investigator: 
G Step One: Generate Characteristics 
G Step Two: Determine Occupation 
G Step Three: Decide Skills and allocate Skill Points 
G Step Four: Create a backstory 
G Step Five: Equip investigator 
Step 1: Generate                   Characteristics 
A characteristic is one of eight numbers that create the foundations for an investigator. In the game, each charac­teristic represents an aspect of an investigator—intelligence, dexterity and so on. These identified quantities determine the relative capability of investigators and suggest ways for them to act and react during play. 
Characteristic values are generated randomly by rolling two or more six-sided dice. Each rolled result is then multi­plied by 5 to generate a percentage number that may initially range between 15% and 90%. 
Rolling Characteristics 
Initially write your results on a piece of scrap paper before writing them on to the investigator sheet as they may be modified by the age of your investigator. 
STR (Strength): Roll 3D6 and multiply by 5 to generate the Strength characteristic. 
Strength measures the muscle power of an investigator. The higher it is, the more the investigator can lift or tightly cling to something. This characteristic determines the damage an investigator inflicts in hand-to-hand combat. Reduced to STR 0, an investigator is an invalid, unable to get out of bed. 
CON (Constitution): Roll 3D6 and multiply by 5 to generate the Constitution characteristic. 
Constitution represents health, vigor and vitality. Poisons and diseases may directly challenge an investigator’s con­stitution. Investigators with a high constitution often have more hit points—the better to resist injury and attack. Serious physical injury or magical attack might lower the statistic, and if constitution reaches zero, the investigator dies. 


Do Low Characteristics Make Useless Investigators? 
Often in roleplaying games, the higher the player char­acter’s characteristics, the better the chances for that character’s success in the game. However, in Call of Cthulhu, low characteristic scores do not always mean that the investigator will be hindered and unable to perform as part of the investigator’s group. Often one or two low characteristic scores can help to bring the investigator ‘to life’ and feel more real—as opposed to some incredible superhuman! 
Rather than rejecting a low roll try to incorporate it in to the overall makeup of your investigator. Perhaps a low dexterity means that the investigator has suffered some form of leg or hand injury whilst in the armed forces, or a low education is the result of never attend­

SIZ (Size): Roll 2D6+6 and multiply by 5 to generate a Size characteristic. 
Size averages both height and weight into a single number. To see over a wall, to squeeze through a small opening or even to judge whose head might be sticking up out of the grass, use size. Size helps determine hit points and damage bonus and build. One might decrease SIZ to indicate the loss of a limb, though lowering DEX is more often the solution. Presumably if investigators lose all SIZ points they disappear—goodness knows to where! 
DEX (Dexterity): Roll 3D6 and multiply by 5 to generate a Dexterity characteristic. 
Investigators with higher Dexterity scores are quicker, nimbler and more physically flexible. A DEX roll might be made to grab a support to keep from falling, to move faster than an opponent or to accomplish some delicate task. An investigator with zero DEX is uncoordinated and unable to perform physical tasks. 
In combat, the character with the highest DEX acts first (see Chapter 6: Combat). 
APP (Appearance): Roll 3D6 and multiply by 5 to generate an Appearance characteristic. 
Appearance measures both physical attractiveness and personality. A person with high APP is charming and likeable, but may lack conventional good looks. An inves­tigator with APP of 0 is appallingly ugly or someone with a wholly detestable demeanor, provoking comment and shock everywhere. 

APP may be useful in social encounters or when trying to make a good impression. 
INT (Intelligence): Roll 2D6+6 and multiply by 5 to generate an Intelligence characteristic. 
Intelligence represents how well investigators learn, remem­ber, analyze information and solve complex puzzles. An investigator with zero INT is a babbling, drooling idiot. 
Intelligence determines the number of Personal Interest skill points (multiply INT × 2) allotted to a new investigator (see Personal Interests page @@). INT also acts as the value for both Idea rolls and Intelligence rolls (see Chapter 5: Game System). 
If the amount of INT seems to contradict another char­acteristic, that’s another chance for roleplaying and further defining your investigator. For example, an investigator with high EDU and low INT might be a pedantic teacher or a sideshow performer, someone who knows facts but not their meanings. Conversely, high INT and low EDU might mean ignorance—such as an uneducated farm boy, new to the Big City—however this person would not be dull-witted. 
POW (Power): Roll 3D6 and multiply by 5 to generate a Power characteristic. 
Power indicates force of will: the higher the POW, the higher the aptitude for, and resistance to, magic. An investigator with zero POW is zombie-like and without ‘purpose’, as well as being unable to use magic. Unless stated otherwise, POW that is lost during the game is lost permanently. 
Sanity points (SAN) begin the game equal to the char­acter’s POW. Sanity points are covered in more detail in Chapter 8: Sanity. 
POW dictates the character’s number of ‘magic points’, which, unlike POW, can be spent and regenerated during play. Magic points are equal to one-fifth of POW (see Chap­ter 10: Magic). 
The POW of ordinary characters and investigators rarely changes. However, those adroit in the mysteries of the magic of the Cthulhu Mythos may be able to increase their person­al POW. 
EDU (Education): Roll 2D6+6 and multiply by 5 to generate an Education characteristic. 
Education is a measure of the formal and factual knowledge possessed by the investigator, as well as indicating the time the investigator has spent in full-time education. EDU mea­sures retained information, not the intelligent application of that information (see Intelligence). An investigator without EDU would be like a newborn baby or an amnesiac—with­out knowledge of the world, probably very curious and credulous. 
An EDU of 60 suggests the investigator is a high school graduate, whilst a score of around 70 indicates a person with some college years. Those with an EDU greater than 80 have most likely conducted graduate level work and have a degree, as expected of a person who has been to a university of some kind. Note that sometimes a person with a high Education may not necessarily be schooled in the tradition­al sense, but rather may be self-taught and possess a highly studious and observant nature. 
EDU is a factor in determining how many Occupational skill points (see Occupation Skills page @@) an investigator begins with, and represents the investigator’s starting per­centage for the Own Language skill (see page @@). EDU is also used when making Know rolls (see Chapter 5: Game System). 
Note: From hereon, any references to a characteristic are to the full value (dice roll multiplied by five). Any adjust­ments are made to that value. 
Luck 
When creating an investigator roll 3D6 and multiply by 5 for a Luck score. See Chapter 5: Game System for how Luck is used. 
Age 
A player can choose any age between 15 and 90 for their investigator. If you wish to create an investigator outside this age range, it is up to the Keeper to adjudicate. Use the appropriate modifiers for your chosen age only (they are not cumulative). 
T 15 to 19 years old: Deduct 5 points amongst STR and SIZ. Deduct 5 points from EDU. Roll twice to generate a Luck score (see Luck, above) and use the higher value. 
T20 to 39 years old: Make an improvement check for EDU. 
T 40 to 49 years old: Make 2 improvement checks for EDU and deduct 5 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. 
T 50 to 59 years old: Make 3 improvement checks for EDU and deduct 10 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 10. 
T 60 to 69 years old: Make 4 improvement checks for EDU and deduct 20 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 15. 
T 70 to 79 years old: Make 4 improvement checks for EDU and deduct 40 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 20. 
T 80 to 89 years old: Make 4 improvement checks for EDU and deduct 80 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 25. 
To make an EDU improvement check, simply roll per­centage dice. If the result is greater than your present EDU, add 1D10 percentage points to your EDU characteristic (note that EDU cannot go above 99). 

Half and Fifth Characteristic Values 
Once the percentage values for each characteristic have been determined, the next step is to write in the half and fifth val­ues for each characteristic on the investigator sheet, entering the values alongside the percentage. 
• 
Divide the percentage value by two, rounding down, and enter after the ‘half ’ percentage value. 

• 
Divide the percentage value by five, rounding down, and enter the ‘fifth’ value after the half value. 


When a "characteristic value" is referred to in the text, this means the full value (highest number). Where half or fifth values are required, this will be clearly stated, normally called Hard (half value) and Extreme (fifth value) rolls. 
Half and fifth are the only fractions used in relation to characteristics and skills in the game and all the numbers are calculated up front so that play is not hindered by mental calculations. A Quick Reference Chart for half and fifth values can be found on page @@. 
Alternatively, an electronic investigator sheet that auto­matically does all calculations for you is available from the www.chaosium.com website. 

Other Attributes 
Damage Bonus and Build [STR & SIZ] 
All investigators, Keeper-controlled characters and monsters have two attributes known as ‘Damage Bonus’ (DB) and Build. Larger and stronger creatures and humans do more physical damage than their weaker brethren. 
To determine damage bonus, add STR to SIZ and look up the total on Table 1: Damage Bonus and Build, reading across to find the damage bonus. Each range of results cor­relates with a die modifier or dice roll. Build is determined using the same figures. 
In hand-to-hand combat, add the indicated Damage Bonus modifier or roll to all the character’s blows, whether using a natural weapon, such as a fist, or a melee weapon such as a club or knife. 
Build is used in fighting maneuvers and chases, and also to give a sense of scale. Note: Damage bonus is not applied to firearms attacks. 

Hit Points [CON & SIZ] 
Hit points are used to track the cumulative damage inflict­ed upon an investigator, non-player character or monster during the game, and indicate how long he or she can stay in the action before collapsing from pain, exhaustion or death. 
Figure out the character’s hit point total by adding CON and SIZ,then dividing the total by ten (rounding down any fractions). 
The investigator sheet is designed to help the player keep track of hit points and wounds. Enter the investigator’s Hit Point Total in the box marked ‘Hit Points’. For more details on hit points and wounds, see Physical Injury (page @@). 
Movement Rate (MOV) 
An investigator can move a number of yards (or meters) up 
to five times their MOV value in one round.  
If both DEX and STR are each less than SIZ: If either STR or DEX is equal to or greater than SIZ, or if all three are equal: If both STR and DEX are each greater than SIZ:  MOV 7 MOV 8 MOV 9  

If age is in the 40s: deduct 1 from MOV If age is in the 50s: deduct 2 from MOV If age is in the 60s: deduct 3 from MOV If age is in the 70s: deduct 4 from MOV If age is in the 80s: deduct 5 from MOV Note: Do not apply these MOV rules to non-humans. 


Table 1: Damage Bonus and Build 
STR + SIZ Damage Bonus Build 
2 — 64 –2 –2 65 — 84 –1 –1 85 — 124 None 0 125 — 164 +1D4 +1 165 — 204 +1D6 +2 205 — 284 +2D6 +3 285 — 364 +3D6 +4 365 — 444 +4D6 +5 445 — 524 +5D6* +6* 
*Add an additional 1D6 to Damage Bonus and +1 to Build for each additional 80 points or fraction thereof. 

Step 2: Determine Occupation 
An occupation shows how an investigator makes a living, be it as a doctor, a student or lowlife fraudster. An occupation also reflects a particular investigator’s field of expertise, and so dictates which of their skills should be higher. 
The actual occupation of your investigator will have limited effect during the game; it is simply a basis for your investigator’s starting skills and helping to define his or her backstory. Some occupations are typically Lovecraftian: Antiquarian, Author, Dilettante, Doctor of Medicine, Jour­nalist, Police Detective and Professor. Other occupations are not those you would normally find in a Lovecraft story, however they may interest particular players and be fun to play in a Call of Cthulhu game. 
An occupation ties together a cluster of skills. For instance, in the sample occupations, ‘Antiquarian’ encom­passes: Appraise, Art/Craft, History, Library Use, Other Language, one interpersonal skill (Charm, Fast Talk, In­timidate or Persuade), Spot Hidden, and one other skill of the player’s choice (to reflect something special or relevant about the investigator’s past). Some occupations include no free choices; others may have two or more. 
Once you have chosen the occupation for your investi­gator, write it down on the investigator sheet and then make a note of the occupations’ professional skills. 
Sample occupations can be found on page @@. 


34 


*for each +80 points or fraction thereof, +1D6 DB and +1 Build 
STR+SIZ DB Build 
2 to 64 –2 –2 65 to 84 –1 –1 85 to 124 0 0 125 to 164 +1D4 1 165 to 204 +1D6 2 205 to 284* +2D6 3 285 to 364 +3D6 4 365 to 444 +4D6 5 445 to 524 +5D6 6 


Step 3: Decide Skills and Allocate Skill Points 
Occupation Skills 
After you have chosen an occupation, calculate your occupa­tion skill points using the characteristics specified alongside the occupation. Allocate the resulting total as percentage points amongst those skills listed for the occupation—your investigator’s professional skills. Points should also be allocat­ed to Credit Rating within the range indicated for the occu­pation. Not all the skills need to have points allotted to them, however points left undistributed are lost. Note that each skill has a number in brackets next to it on the investigator sheet: this is the base chance of success in that skill, and any points allocated to that skill are added to this base number. 
Write down the total points for each skill on the investi­gator sheet (the points you’ve allocated plus the base chance printed on the investigator sheet). The sheet also has space to write in the half and fifth values for each skill, allowing you to reference them quickly in the middle of a game. A Quick Reference Chart for half and fifth values can be found on page @@. It is advised that you allocate occupation skill points and then personal interest skill points before writing in the half and fifth values alongside the full value for each skill, as personal interest skill points can be used to bolster occupation skills as well as other non-occupation skills (see Personal Interests following). 
Personal Interests 
Investigators also draw upon experience, skills and knowl­edge gained from hobbies and other non-professional ac­tivities, called personal interests. Multiply the investigator’s INT × 2 and allot the points to any skills (which can include adding further points to occupation skills), except Cthulhu Mythos (unless otherwise agreed with the Keeper). 
Write down the total points for each skill on the investigator sheet (the points you’ve allocated plus the base chance printed on the investigator sheet). The sheet also has space to write in the half and fifth values for each skill, allowing you to reference them quickly in the middle of a game. A Quick Reference Chart for half and fifth values can be found on page @@. 
Weapons and Firearm skills
 Fighting and Firearms skills, and their various specializa­tions, allow an investigator to use weapons. Personal interest or occupation skill points (if applicable) may be spent to raise any of these skills. When an occupation includes the skill of Fighting or Firearms, and no specialization is speci­fied, it is up to the player to choose one or more specializa­tions of that skill (see Chapter 4: Skills). 

When Choosing an Occupation, There are Some Things to Consider. 
Try to have a picture in your mind about who and what your investigator is—your character concept. Look for occupations that suit this concept and add color to it. Remember, rolling up an investigator is all about build­ing up a story of who you want to play in the game. Your characteristics, occupation, sex and age all help to establish a fully rounded, ‘breathing’ investigator. 
Look through the skills associated with each occu­pation and see which of these you like the most. Cer­tain skills are likely to appeal to you more. Perhaps you want your investigator to be a man of action, leading you to choose an occupation with skills like Fighting, Climb and Throw. Alternatively you might decide to create a more studious investigator, with skill in Library Use, Spot Hidden and Psychology. 
Also, you might want to consider your investiga­tor’s occupation and skill set in relation to the other players and what kind of investigators they will be playing. Creating a balance of occupations means that the group has a good mix of skills that will benefit ev­eryone. Depending on the style of game and scenario you will be playing, your Keeper might have certain occupations in mind for you to play. Discuss your ideas with the other players in order to build the most appro­priate group of investigators for your game. After all, it will be somewhat strange for everyone to turn up with musicians when the scenario is set in the Antarctic! 
Remember, it’s not what your investigator can or can’t do, it’s how you decide to ‘play’ your character that is really important, and that, above all, will often determine your enjoyment of the game! 

Credit Rating 
An investigator’s starting Credit Rating  is determined during character creation, based upon the investigator’s chosen profession (see Sample Occupations page @@). In play, Credit Rating determines the amount of money a character has available (see below). Credit Rating also in­dicates the general living standards a person can afford, as well indicating the character’s relative status in society (see Credit Rating in Chapter 4: Skills). 
Your investigator’s Credit Rating skill begins at zero. The range of starting levels for each profession can be broad, 


and the level chosen should reflect the investigator’s rank in that profession. For example, ‘criminal’ could be used as a profession for a poor lone pickpocket (Credit Rating 9) or for a wealthy gang boss (Credit Rating 90). Any number of skill points can be invested in Credit Rating within the recommended limits for that profession. 
There are six living standards: penniless, poor, average, wealthy, rich and super rich. Each one determines the life­style, type of accommodation, travel and expenses that a person can comfortably afford on a day-to-day basis. 
Step 4: Create a Backstory 
Not one man who participated in that terrible raid could ever be induced to say a word concerning it, and every fragment of the vague data which survives comes from those outside the final fighting party. There is something frightful in the care with which these actual raiders destroyed each scrap which bore the least allusion to the matter. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Case Of Charles Dexter Ward 

Most of the ideas and abilities that make an investigator inter­esting and fun to play are a matter of choice—not necessarily dice roll results. Think about what personal history, friends, enemies and achievements could have led your investigator to delve in to the secrets of the Mythos. 
There are ten categories listed on the back of the investigator sheet; try to write down at least one entry for the first six (Person­al Description, Ideology/Beliefs, Significant People, Meaningful Locations, Treasured Possessions and Traits). It’s not essential to have an entry for each category, but the more you are able to define, the more your investigator comes to life. Further entries may be added or existing ones altered during play. 
The categories of Injuries & Scars, Phobias & Manias, Ar­cane Tomes, Spells & Artifacts, and Encounters with Strange Entities may be written in during play. Of course, some in­vestigators might start the game with a significant injury or scar if implied by your investigator’s history—if so, write it in. 
An investigator’s background serves three functions in the game: 
First, as a set of pithy statements that serve as a guide to roleplaying, helping to define your investigator and remind you how he or she relates to the world. 

An investigator is about to encounter the Cthulhu Mythos for the first time. 



Second, they can be called upon during the investigator development phase for the recovery of sanity points (see Investigator Development Phase, page @@). 
Third, and perhaps most importantly of all, the corrup­tion of the investigator’s background mirrors their loss of sanity and growing knowledge of the Mythos, as all that was once held dear becomes meaningless. During episodes of insanity, or as a result of major wounds, the Keeper may add or amend a background entry. Ultimately the investigator’s only connections to the world are madness and pain. 
When crafting background entries, be specific, emotional and emphatic 
Try to phrase each entry to emphasize its personal nature. For example, “my wife” identifies the subject, but tells us nothing about the nature of the relationship. 
A) Specify a name. Name the person or place, identify the item or concept. 
B) Attach a feeling. Start with positive or negative and build from there. 
Make it intense, use love instead of like, use despise instead of dislike. Be emphatic; use “must” in place of “would prefer”. Try to phrase it in a way that makes it personal and meaningful. 

Using Random Tables for Inspiration 
Sometimes coming up with background details on the fly can be difficult. The following random tables provide a way to quickly determine some background details—you can ei­ther roll on the tables or simply pick ones that seem suitable, or just use the lists for inspiration. 
As appropriate, roll 1D10 on each of the following charts to select an entry for each category. Each option has some examples to get you started. Don’t feel constrained to use what you roll; if it doesn’t mesh with your character concept then roll again or choose a different option. However, don’t dismiss it out of hand; sometimes something that is at first incongruous will add an unexpected but welcome twist to a character. 
Above all, be clear that the random tables are there as a springboard for your imagination. Each dice roll will give you something from that realm of life to react to; embrace it or reject it, but be sure to react to it and use it to help fuel your imagination. Weave the background together to make a credible all-round character. 
"Dear, did you hear something outside?" For example: you might be creating a male investigator in his twenties, with no thought of any family. Rolling for ‘signif­icant people’ indicates a child. You may not have considered that your character has a child, but why not? Becoming a father may not have been intentional. Consider the options; you may have had an affair with a married woman, your wife may have died and your child fostered, or you may be happily married with a family. 
Personal Description 
Think of a distinct ‘look’ that sums up your investigator’s appearance (APP). 
Here are some possibilities (choose rather than roll): 
Rugged  Handsome  Ungainly  
Pretty  Glamorous  Baby-faced  
Smart  Untidy  Dull  
Dirty  Dazzler  Bookish  
Youthful  Weary  Plump  
Stout  Hairy  Slim  
Elegant  Scruffy  Stocky  
Pale  Sullen  Ordinary  
Rosy  Tanned  Wrinkled  
Stuffy  Mousy  Sharp  
Brawny  Dainty  Muscular  
Strapping  Gawky  Frail  

Ideology/Beliefs 
Roll 1D10 or pick one of the fol­lowing. Take the result and make it specific and personal to your inves­tigator. 
1: There is a higher power that you worship and pray to (e.g. Vishnu, Jesus Christ, Haile Selassie I). 
2: Mankind can do fine without religions (e.g. staunch atheist, humanist, secularist). 
3: Science has all the answers. Pick a particular aspect of interest (e.g. evolution, cryo­genics, space exploration). 
4: A belief in fate (e.g. karma, the class system, superstitious). 
5: Member of a society or se­cret society (e.g. Freemason, Women’s Institute, Anony­mous). 
6: There is evil in society that should be rooted out. What is this evil? (e.g. drugs, violence, racism). 
7: The occult (e.g. astrology, spiritualism, tarot). 
8: Politics (e.g. conservative, socialist, liberal). 
9: “Money is power, and I’m going to get all I can” (e.g. greedy, enterprising, ruthless). 
10: Campaigner/Activist (e.g. feminism, equal rights, union power). 
Significant People 
Roll 1D10 or pick one from each of the two lists below. Take the result and make it specific and personal to your investigator. Think of a name for these people. 
First, who? 
1: Parent (e.g. mother, father, stepmother). 
2: Grandparent (e.g. maternal grandmother, paternal grand­father). 


Living Standards Credit Rating 0: Penniless 
A person that cannot even afford the level of ‘poor‘ is considered penniless. Accommodation: such a person would be living on the street. Travel: walking, hitchhiking or stowing away on a train or ship. 
Credit Rating 1-9: Poor 
Able to afford the bare minimum of a roof over their head and at least one meager meal each day. Accommodation: restricted to the cheapest rental housing or fleabag hotel. Travel: public transport of the cheapest sort. Any transport possessed will be cheap and unreliable. 
Credit Rating 10-49: Average 
A reasonable level of comfort, three meals a day and occasional treat. Accommodation: an average home or apartment, either rented or privately owned. Expect to stay in moderately priced hotels. Travel: standard forms of travel can be used, but not first class. In a mod­ern-day period, this person would be likely to own a reliable car. 
Credit Rating 50-89: Wealthy 
This level of wealth affords luxury and comfort. Accommodation: a substantial residence, perhaps with some domestic help (butler, housekeeper, cleaner, gardener, etc.) Possibly a second home in the country or abroad. Stay in expensive hotels. Travel: first class. This person would own an expensive car or equivalent. 
Credit Rating 90+: Rich 
This level of wealth affords great luxury and comfort. Accommodation: a plush residence or estate with abundant domestic help (but­ler, servants, cleaner, gardener, etc.). Second homes in the country and abroad. Stay in top hotels. Travel: first class. In the modern day this person would own numerous luxury cars. There is no requirement to make any account for accommodation, food or inciden­tal travel expenses so long as an investigator’s spending falls within the bounds of his or her living standard. Refer to the spending levels below if the investigator wishes to make more significant purchases. 
Credit Rating 99: Super Rich 
As Rich, but money is really no object. Individuals in this category are among the richest in the world. 

3: Sibling (e.g. brother, half-brother, stepsister). 
4: Child (son or daughter). 
5: Partner (e.g. spouse, fiancé, lover). 
6: Person who taught you your highest occupational skill. Identify the skill and consider who taught you 
(e.g. a schoolteacher, the person you apprenticed with, your father). 

7: Childhood Friend (e.g. classmate, neighbor, imagi­nary friend). 
8: A famous person. Your idol or hero. You may never have even met (e.g. film star, politician, musician). 
9: A fellow investigator in your game. Pick one or choose randomly. 
10: A non-player character (NPC) in the game. Ask the Keeper to pick one for you. 
Next, roll to determine why that person is so significant to you. Not all of these options will mesh with every per­son, so you may have to roll more than once or simply pick something that feels appropriate. 
1: You are indebted to them. How did they help you? 
(e.g. financially, they protected you through hard times, got you your first job). 

2: They taught you something. What? (e.g. a skill, to love, to be a man). 
3: They give your life meaning. How? (e.g. you aspire to be like them, you seek to be with them, you seek to make them happy). 
4: You wronged them and seek reconciliation. What did you do? (e.g. stole money from them, informed the police about them, refused to help when they were desperate). 
5: Shared experience. What? (e.g. you lived through hard times together, you grew up together, you served in the war together). 
6: You seek to prove yourself to them. How? (e.g. by getting a good job, by finding a good spouse, by getting an education). 
7: You idolize them (e.g. for their fame, their beauty, their work). 
8: A feeling of regret (e.g. you should have died in their place, you fell out over something you said, you didn’t step up and help them when you had the chance). 
9: You wish to prove yourself better than them. What was their flaw? (e.g. lazy, drunk, unloving). 
10: They have crossed you and you seek revenge. For what do you blame them? (e.g. death of a loved one, your financial ruin, marital breakup). 
Meaningful Locations 
Roll 1D10 or pick one of the following. Take the result and make it specific and personal to your investigator. Think of a name for these places. 
1:  Your seat of learning (e.g. school, university, ap­prenticeship).  
2:  Your hometown (e.g. rural village, market town, busy city).  
3:  The place you met your first love (e.g. a music con­cert, on holiday, a bomb shelter).  
4:  A place for quiet contemplation (e.g. the library, country walks on your estate, fishing).  
5:  A place for socializing (e.g. gentlemen’s club, local bar, uncle’s house).  
6:  A place connected with your ideology/belief (e.g. parish church, Mecca, Stonehenge).  
7:  The grave of a significant person. Who? (a parent, a child, a lover).  
8:  Your family home (e.g. a country estate, a rented flat, the orphanage in which you were raised).  
9:  The place you were happiest in your life (e.g. the park bench where you first kissed, your university).  

10: Your workplace (e.g. the office, library, bank). 
Treasured Possessions 
Roll 1D10 or pick one of the following. Take the result and make it specific and personal to your investigator. 
1: An item connected with your highest skill (e.g. ex­pensive suit, false ID, brass knuckles). 
2: An essential item for your occupation (e.g. doctor’s bag, car, lock picks). 
3: A memento from your childhood (e.g. comics, pocketknife, lucky coin). 
4: A memento of a departed person (e.g. jewelry, a photograph in your wallet, a letter). 
5: Something given to you by your Significant Person 
(e.g. a ring, a diary, a map). 
6: Your collection. What is it? (e.g. bus tickets, stuffed animals, records). 
7: Something you found but you don’t know what it is – you seek answers (e.g. a letter you found in a cupboard written in an unknown language, a curious pipe of un­known origin found among your late father’s effects, a curious silver ball you dug up in your garden). 
8: A sporting item (e.g. cricket bat, a signed baseball, a fishing rod). 
9: A weapon (e.g. service revolver, your old hunting rifle, the hidden knife in your boot). 
10: A pet (e.g. a dog, a cat, a tortoise). 
Traits 
Roll 1D10 or pick one of the following. Take the result and make it specific and personal to your investigator. 
1: Generous (e.g. generous tipper, always helps out a person in need, philanthropist). 
2: Good with Animals (e.g. loves cats, grew up on a farm, good with horses). 
3: Dreamer (e.g. given to flights of fancy, visionary, highly creative). 
4: Hedonist (e.g. life and soul of the party, entertaining drunk, ‘live fast and die young’). 
5: Gambler and a risk-taker (e.g. poker-faced, try any­thing once, lives on the edge). 
6: Good Cook (e.g. bakes wonderful cakes, can make a meal from almost nothing, refined palate). 
7: Ladies’ man/seductress (e.g. suave, charming voice, enchanting eyes). 
8: Loyal (e.g. stands by his or her friends, never breaks a promise, would die for his or her beliefs). 
9: A good reputation (e.g. the best after-dinner speaker in the country, the most pious of men, fearless in the face of danger). 
10: Ambitious (e.g. to achieve a goal, to become the boss, to have it all). 
Key Background Connection 
Consider your investigator’s background, and pick the one entry that you feel is most important. This is their key con­nection: the one thing above all else that gives meaning to their life. Mark it with star or underline it on the investigator sheet. This connection can aid your investigator in regaining Sanity points (see Chapter 8: Sanity). 
Everything in the story is open to the Keeper to do with as he or she desires, except for the investigator’s key con­nection. The key connection cannot be destroyed, killed or taken away by the Keeper without first allowing the player the opportunity to roll dice to, in some way, save that key connection. 
The idea of the players being able to nominate some­thing in the game world that has immunity may sound daunting (to the Keeper) at first. However, this immunity is quite limited; the key connection can be killed, removed or destroyed by the Keeper, but the investigator to whom they are ‘connected’ must be involved, or given the option to become involved. In game play this means that the player must be presented with the opportunity to make at least one dice roll to save the connection. 

Losing one’s key connection during play requires a Sani­ty roll (1/1D6 Sanity point loss, see Chapter 8: Sanity). 

Additional Details 
Fill in the following details on the investigator sheet. 
Birthplace 
Most of Lovecraft’s stories take place in New England.You can choose to start there if you wish; however your investigator could originate from anywhere in the world. No game penalty or advantage exists for one country or culture over another. The choice can lead to other deductions: for instance, while an investigator born in the United States of America or Can­ada has a good chance of English as his or her own language, an investigator born in Quebec might learn French at infancy, whilst one born in Arizona might have Spanish or Navajo, and one born in San Francisco might speak Cantonese. 
Gender of the Investigator 
The investigator can be male or female. No game rule distinguishes between male and female; neither sex has an advantage over the other. Players are encouraged to play either sex based upon their preference rather than tactical considerations. Some published scenarios may consider the effect of gender in specific societies and historical periods. 
Name 
The name of the investigator is whatever the player finds entertaining or evocative. Fashions in names change over the decades, and certain names may fit one historical period and setting better than others. 
Picture 
A space exists on the investigator sheet for you to draw a picture of your investigator. If you prefer, you could cut out a suitable portrait from a magazine or print one from the Internet. It’s a useful way to introduce your investigator to the other players. Even a small picture can say a lot. 
Step Five: Equip the Investiga­tor 
Your investigator’s day-to­day living standards are dictated by the Credit Rat­ing score. The likelihood of owning major posses­sions, such as a house and a car, are also indicated by the Credit Rating score. The Keeper will advise on what other equipment an investigator may start out with. A player may buy ad­ditional items, if available for purchase. 
Cash and Assets 
The following amounts, in US dollars, by period, denote the wealth of an in­vestigator. Cash is readily available to the investiga­tor, whereas wealth that is tied up in assets can only be spent if time is taken to realize the capital. 
Cross reference the in­vestigator’s Credit Rating with the period to deter­mine the investigator’s available cash, assets and spending level. 
Notes: 
Cash: Not necessarily carried on the person. The Keeper may ask where it is being kept. For example, if the investigator is trav-

Table II: Cash and Assets 
1920s: 
Credit Rating 
Penniless 
(CR 0 or less) Poor (CR 1-9) 
Average 
(CR 10-49) Wealthy              (CR 50-89) 
Rich (CR 90-98) 
Super Rich          (CR 99) 
Modern: 
Credit Rating 
Penniless 
(CR 0 or less) Poor (CR 1-9) 
Average 
(CR 10-49) Wealthy              (CR 50-89) 
Rich                     (CR 90-98) 
Super Rich       (CR 99) 
Cash 
$0.50 
CR x 1 
($1 - $9) CR x 2 ($20 - $98) 

CR x 5 ($250 -
$445) CR x 20 ($1800 - $1960) 
$50,000 
Cash 
$10 
CR x 20 
($20 - $180) CR x 40 ($400 - $1,960) 
CR x 100 ($5,000 - $8,900 
CR x 400 ($36,000 -$39,200)) 
$1 million 
Assets 
None 
CR x 10 
($10 - $90) CR x 50 ($500 - $2450) 
CR x 500 ($25,000 - $44,500) CR x 2000 ($180,000 -$196,000) 
$5M+ 
Assets 
None 
CR x 200 
($200 - $1,800) CR x 1,000 ($10,000 - $49,000) 
CR x 10,000 
($500,000 - $890,000) CR x 2000 ($36M - $39.2M) 
$100 million+ 
Spending Level 
$0.50 $2 $10 $50 $250 
$5000 
Spending Level 
$10 $40 $ 200 $1,000 $5,000 
$100,000 


elling abroad, are they keeping it in a money belt or is there someone back home who can wire money to them when requested. This will have an impact if the investigator is robbed or loses their gear. 
Spending Level: This is an arbitrary amount below which, for ease of play, no record keeping is required. A character can spend up to his or her spending level with no expenditure of cash. In theory an investigator could spend an amount just below their spending level every day, but in practice it should be used only occasionally—if the Keeper feels a player is exploiting this financial abstraction, a use of assets may be called for. The spending levels exist purely to ease the flow of the game; no one wants to track every penny. 
Assets: Assets are the things that your investigator owns at the start of play and the dollar amount on the chart is the total value of those things. The player should note down the dollar amount and decide the form it takes, usually property or investments, or perhaps shares in a business.  The standard list of possessions is included within the various brackets of living standards. If your living standard includes a house and car, those things constitute a part of your asset value. 

Equipment 
The final step is to write down any important items, weapons or equipment your investigator possesses. There’s no need to write a detailed list of everything your character owns—just list the notable items. In many cases, starting investigators don’t really have anything exceptional or worth writing down in the way of equipment—that’s fine as you’ll soon be un­covering all manner of strange and remarkable items during the game. Items that fit the profile of your investigator’s living standard do not need to be paid for—you simply own those. 
Even if your investigator takes no weapons, he or she may still use them. Perhaps your investigator served in a war, or gained some familiarity with knives or guns while growing up on a farm. Few people in any era are expert with weapons, though often they have passing acquaintance with them. Except for a few occupations like Soldier, additional skill points for Fighting and Firearms normally come out of personal interest skill points. 
Refer to the Equipment lists (pages @@-@@) and Table 
XVII: Weapons (pages @@-@@). 


Other Ways of  Creating Investigators 
The bottom line in creating an investigator is that you gen­erate a set of characteristics that fit within the appropriate range of values. The method you use is secondary to this, and different groups will agree on different methods. Some prefer a random approach; others prefer varying degrees of freedom to exchange or modify the values, perhaps with a view to fitting the characteristics to a preconceived character template, or to fit their perception of game balance. 
For these reasons, a selection of alternative methods for creating investigators are listed below. The Keeper should discuss and decide which method or combination of meth­ods for creating investigators best suits his or her group. 
Option 1: Start Over 
Use the default method. If you don’t like your dice rolls then scrap them and start again. The Keeper may allow the use of this option whenever a player rolls three or more character­istics that begin below 50. 
Option 2: Modifying Low Rolls 
Use the default method. If you feel there are too many low rolls (perhaps three or more under 10), roll an additional 1D6 and share out the extra points among the lowest dice rolls before multiplying by 5. 
Option 3: Choosing Where to Place Rolled Characteristics 
Roll and record five rolls of 3D6 and three rolls of 2D6+6. Multiply each of these eight results by 5. 
Allocate the characteristic values as you wish among the eight characteristics. There is a recommended minimum value of 40 for INT and SIZ, although these may be lower, with the Keeper’s agreement. 
Option 4: Point Buy Characteristics 
Share 460 points among the eight characteristics as you wish (within the 15 to 90 range). There is a recommended minimum value of 40 for INT and SIZ, although these may be lower with the Keeper’s agreement, and no characteristic can be lower than 15. 
Option 5: Quick Fire Method 
This method is recommended if you wish to get up and running quickly. G Allocate 40, 50, 50, 50, 60, 60, 70, 80 where you like among your characteristics. 
G Apply age and EDU modifiers (see page @@). 
G Figure Damage Bonus and Build (see page @@). 
G Figure Hit Points (CON+SIZ divided by 10) and Luck (3D6 x 5). 
G Decide an occupation and select eight appropriate occupation skills. 
G Allocate the following values among the eight occu­pation skills and Credit Rating: one at 70%, two at 60%, three at 50% and three at 40% (set the skills directly to these values and ignore the skill base val­ues). If your chosen profession states a lower Credit Rating skill than 40%, you should set an appropriate Credit Rating skill value and distribute the excess points elsewhere. 
G Pick four non-occupation skills and boost them by 20% (adding 20 to the skill base values). 
G Roll for background details then elaborate upon them later, during play. 
G Start Playing. 
G Fill in half and fifth values during play. 
G Sort out money if and when you need it. 
Option 6: Reaching the Heights of Human Potential 
You may have noticed that many characteristics have a maximum of 99, but the dice rolls only allow for a maxi­mum score of 90. If you wish to allow for truly exceptional investigators, allow an extra 1D10 percentage points to distribute as they wish among the characteristics. That way, an investigator with INT 90 can boost it to 99 with a roll of 9 on the die. 
This option can be used in combination with any other method. 
Optional Rule: A Cap on Starting Skill Values 
Investigators having high skills should not unbalance the game, given that some skill rolls will require them to roll under a half or a fifth of their skill. Likewise even a 99% Fighting skill can be dodged or fought back against (and a roll of 100 is always a failure). 
If you feel that high skills are a concern for your group then simply apply an upper limit for starting skills, such as 75%. 



Quick Reference Chart for Half and Fifth Values 
Find the characteristic or skill value under the Base Number column, and read across to determine the half (Hard) and fifth (Extreme) values. 
Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  
1  0  0  26  13  5  51  25  10  76  38  15  
2  1  27  52  26  77  
3  28  14  53  78  39  
4  2  29  54  27  79  
5  1  30  15  6  55  11  80  40  16  
6  3  31  56  28  81  
7  32  16  57  82  41  
8  4  33  58  29  83  
9  34  17  59  84  42  
10  5  2  35  7  60  30  12  85  17  
11  36  18  61  86  43  
12  6  37  62  31  87  
13  38  19  63  88  44  
14  7  39  64  32  89  
15  3  40  20  8  65  13  90  45  18  
16  8  41  66  33  91  
17  42  21  67  92  46  
18  9  43  68  34  93  
19  44  22  69  94  47  
20  10  4  45  9  70  35  14  95  19  
21  46  23  71  96  48  
22  11  47  72  36  97  
23  48  24  73  98  49  
24  12  49  74  37  99  
25  5  50  25  10  75  15  100  50  20  


50 


51 


Mystery attracts mystery. Ever since the wide appearance of my name as a performer of unexplained feats, I have encountered strange narratives and events which my calling has led people to link with my interests and activities. Some of these have been trivial and irrelevant, some deeply dramatic and absorbing, some productive of weird and perilous experiences and some involving me in extensive scientific and historical research. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, Imprisoned With The Pharaohs 


his chapter looks at skills in detail, providing definitions of their use and scope within the game. Each category of skill encompasses a range of possibilities and, to ensure brevity, 
skills have to be general summaries of intent and coverage. 

Skill Definitions 
Skills represent what is known within a certain era, and some skills are tagged [Modern] to denote that they can only be used in modern-day settings. Some skills are given a generic name, which may not be appropriate for some settings; for example, Drive Auto would not be suitable for a game set in Victorian London, and should be reworded appropriately—in this case as Drive Carriage. 
Skill percentiles are not proportions of what is hypothet­ically knowable. If they were able to stack their respective knowledge on a table like poker chips and measure the dif­ference, a physicist of 60% in the modern day knows much more than a physicist of 90% skill in 1910. 
Equally, some skills would be affected by location. A Jap­anese investigator might have a Law skill of 75% in Japan; however if the same investigator were tested on Spanish law then the Keeper would probably increase the level of diffi­culty of the roll. 
A skill level of 50% is high enough to let a character eke out a living from it. If an investigator rises high in a skill un­related to their profession, player and Keeper could confer about changing the investigator to a new profession. 
Specific situations that arise in your game will require the Keeper to make judgments about how to apply the rules regarding skill use. Some suggestions on how to use the skills in specific circumstances are given under individual skills. This use of suggestions is to encourage the Keeper to make judgments rather than referring to a host of spot rules. 
Certain skills embody a wide range of knowledge, such as Art and Craft, Fighting, Firearms and Science, allowing investigators to specialize in narrower avenues of learning. 
Some of the skills detailed below are termed [Uncom­mon] and are not included on the standard investigator sheet (Artillery, Demolitions, Hypnosis, Read Lips, etc.). If the Keeper wishes to include these extra skills in the game, or if a player wishes to take one, this should be made clear. The Keeper may introduce other skills depending on the setting and period; for example, if one were to set a game in the far future on an alien planet then various new skills might be devised. 
Skill Specializations 
Some broad skills are broken in to specializations. A player may spend skill points to purchase any skill specialization. The generic skill cannot be purchased. Thus a player may spend points in Fighting (Brawl) or Fighting (Spear) but not simply Fighting. 

In the case of Art and Craft, Science and Survival, these skills encompass a wide diversity of specializations. The Keeper must decide on the applicability of a particular specialization to the situation in hand. Depending on the specific situation, the Keeper may allow the use of an alternate specialization at an increased level of difficulty if the Keeper agrees that there is sufficient overlap with that specialization. 
Among the specializations there are often transferable skills and knowledge. At the end of this chapter you will find an optional rule for the transferable skill benefit. 

Opposing Skill/Difficulty Level 
For each skill, entry notes are provided for which skill (if any) works in opposition, and suggestions given for what constitutes a Regular and Hard difficulty level. The Regular difficulty level (requiring a roll of equal to or below the skill value) is the default roll. Where things are significantly more difficult, a Hard difficulty level (requiring a roll of equal to or below half of the skill value) may be required. Rarely should the Extreme difficulty level (requiring a roll of equal to or below one-fifth of the skill value) be called for—only in the most extreme and dire situations. Sometimes this may be simply that the performance of the skill is greatly hindered, such as when being shot at or pursued, or when conditions are uniquely appalling. 

Some examples of where an Extreme difficulty might be called for include: 
Demolitions: to defuse an explosive device of a radically different design to any seen before, perhaps of futuristic or alien origin. 
Electrical Repair: working on futuristic or alien technology that uses a form of electronics. 
Listen: Eavesdropping on a quiet conversation in an ex­tremely noisy environment. 
Locksmith: Opening a high security lock with only a piece of wire (i.e. no tools); crack open the most secure of bank vaults. 
Medicine: Diagnosis and treatment of strange, new, or alien medical ailments. 
Psychology: Read someone’s intent or determine that a person is lying if their relevant opposing skill (Intimidate, Fast Talk, Persuade or Charm) is 90% or above. 
Pushing Skills 
For each skill, a number of examples are provided for what might constitute a ‘pushed roll’(see page @@ for Pushed Rolls), and also some of the possible consequences for fail­ing a pushed roll. The suggestions given should be viewed as simply that—suggestions. The latitude for what could justi­fy a pushed roll is wide, and should be best determined by actions, motivations and events within the game. Likewise, the consequences of a failed pushed roll will be best served if inspiration is drawn from current game events, non-player characters and the game world. 

Likewise, where appropriate, an example is provided for a possible consequence of an investigator pushing a skill roll whilst insane. The very fact that the investigator is insane whilst performing a task heightens the stakes for the roll, as the consequences of a pushed failure will often be all the more extreme (or bizarre). 
The examples merely provide ideas, and it is intended that both players and Keepers fashion their own justifica­tions and consequences as appropriate to their games and playing styles. 
Combined Skill Rolls 
In some situations the Keeper may ask for a roll against more than one skill. Only one dice roll is made; the result is then compared with each of the skills named. The Keeper will specify whether a success is required for both skills or if only one of the skills need be successful. 

Skill List 
Key: 
i denotes a skill only available in Modern Era games. 
T denotes an uncommon skill not written on the standard in­vestigator sheet. 
G denotes a skill that is broken up in to various separate skills. 
Accounting (05%) Acting (05%)—see Art/Craft Animal Handling (05%) T Anthropology (01%) Appraise (05%) Archaeology (01%) Art and Craft (05%) G Artillery (01%) T Astronomy (01%)—see Science Axe (15%)—see Fighting Biology (01%)—see Science Botany (01%)—see Science Bow (15%)—see Firearms Brawl (25%)—see Fighting Chainsaw (10%)—see Fighting Charm (15%) Chemistry (01%)—see Science Climb (20%) Computer Use (05%) i Credit Rating (00%) Cryptography (01%)—see Sci­
ence Cthulhu Mythos (00%) Demolitions (01%) T Disguise (05%) Diving (01%) Dodge (half DEX) 
Drive Auto (20%) Electrical Repair (10%) Electronics (01%) i Fast Talk (05%) Fighting (varies) G Fine Art (05%)—see Art and 
Craft Firearms (varies) G First Aid (30%) Flail (10%)—see Fighting Flamethrower (10%)—see 
Firearms Forensics (01%)—see Science Forgery (05%)—see Art and 
Craft Garrote (15%)—see Fighting Geology (01%)—see Science Handgun (20%)—see Firearms Heavy Weapons (10%)—see 
Firearms History (05%) Hypnosis (01%) T Intimidate (15%) Jump (20%) Language (Other) (01%) G Language (Own) (EDU) Law (05%) Library Use (20%) Listen (20%) Locksmith (01%) Machine Gun (10%)—see Fire­
arms 

Mathematics (01%)—see Sci­ence Mechanical Repair (10%) Medicine (01%) 
Meteorology (01%)—see Sci­ence Natural World (10%)  Navigate (10%) 
Occult (05%) Operate Heavy Machinery (01%) 
Persuade (10%) Pharmacy (01%)—see Science Photography (05%)—see Art 
and Craft Physics (01%)—see Science Pilot (01%) G Psychoanalysis (01%) Psychology (10%) Read Lips (01%) T Ride (05%) Rifle (25%)—see Firearms (Ri­
fle/Shotgun) Science (01%) G Shotgun (25%)—see Firearms 
(Rifle/Shotgun) Sleight of Hand (10%) Spear (20%)—see Firearms (or 
Throw) Spot Hidden (25%) Stealth (20%) Submachine Gun (15%)—see 
Firearms Survival (10%) G Sword (20%)—see Fighting Swim (20%) Throw (20%) Track (10%) Whip (05%)—see Fighting Zoology (01%)—see Science 
Accounting (05%) 
Grants understanding of accountancy procedures and reveals the financial functioning of a business or person. Inspecting the books, one might detect cheated employees, siphoned-off funds, payment of bribes or blackmail, and whether the financial condition is better or worse than claimed. Looking through old accounts, one could see how money was gained or lost in the past (grain, slave-trading, whiskey-running, etc.) and to whom and for what payment was made. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
If someone were trying to conceal something, the difficulty level would be based upon the Accountancy skill of the person doing the concealing. 
i Regular difficulty: comprehensive and well-docu­
mented set of account books. 
i Hard difficulty: disorganized and partial accounts. 
Pushing examples: taking more time to review documents; visiting banks or businesses to validate findings; double checking the math and data. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: discussions between investigators and third parties alert some enemy faction to the investigators’ intentions; a vital part of the accounts is destroyed or lost (perhaps in their tired state the investigator spills coffee over them). 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she might be found having partially eaten the accounts. 
Animal Handling (05%)[Uncommon] 
The ability to command and train domesticated animals to perform simple tasks. The skill is most commonly applied to dogs but may include birds, cats, monkeys and so on (at the Keeper’s discretion). For riding animals, such as horses or camels, the Ride skill is used for breaking in and controlling such mounts. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: getting a trained dog to sit, fetch, or attack on command. 
i Hard difficulty: getting an untrained or unfamiliar dog to perform a task on command. 
Pushing examples: taking greater personal risk, in terms of getting closer to, or directly handling the animal. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the animal attacks the trainer or someone else nearby, most likely caus­ing damage; the animal escapes. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she might be found behaving like the animal they were trying to control. 

Anthropology (01%) 
Enables the user to identify and understand an individual’s way of life through observation. If the skill-user observes another culture from within for a time, or works from accurate records concerning an extinct culture, then simple predictions can be made about that culture’s ways and mor­als, even though the evidence may be incomplete. Studying the culture for a month or more, the anthropologist begins to understand how the culture functions and, in combina­tion with Psychology, may predict the actions and beliefs of those being studied. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
The difficulty for this skill is set according to the exposure of the skill-user to their subject. i Regular difficulty: spending a month or more with the people. 
i Hard difficulty level: spending only a week or less with the people. 

Pushing examples: taking more time to study the target/s; going “native” for a period; taking an active role in a cer­emony, rite, etc. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: being at­tacked or imprisoned by the people studied, due to some perceived transgression of their laws or social mores; suf­fering severe side-effects as the result of being involved in a ceremony which involved ingesting psychotropic plants. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she will be lost among the culture being studied, for example like Dennis Hopper’s photojournalist character in the film Apocalypse Now. 
Appraise (01%) 
Used to estimate the value of a particular item, including the quality, material used and workmanship. Where relevant, the skill-user could pinpoint the age of the item, assess its historical relevance and detect forgeries. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: an item that was not rare at its time of manufacture, and is made of a common material (e.g. 50 year-old gold watch). 
i Hard difficulty: an unusual item, perhaps made of uncommon materials (e.g. a foreign-made object of several hundred years in age, such as an ancient tome). 

Pushing examples: checking an item’s validity with another expert; conducting testing; researching an item. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: accidentally ruining the item in question; bringing the item to the atten­tion of other people, leading to its theft; activating whatever function the item might serve. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she could destroy the item, believing it to be cursed; alternative­ly they regard the item as their personal salvation and refuse to give it up to anyone else. 
Archaeology (01%) 
Allows dating and identification of artifacts from past cul­tures, and the detection of fakes. Ensures expertise in setting up and excavating a dig site. On inspecting a site, the user might deduce the purposes and way of life of those who left the remains. Anthropology might aid in this. Archae­ology also helps identify written forms of extinct human languages. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: sufficient time and resources to do the job properly. 
i Hard difficulty: a lack of time and/or limited re­sources. 
Pushing examples: taking more time to study the site or item; conducting further research; consulting another expert. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: The site is spoiled, with finds ruined through incompetence, vandalism or theft; some higher authority seizes the site or the finds from your control; publicity leads to the finds being stolen. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she keeps digging deeper, ever deeper—the truth is down there somewhere. 
Art and Craft (Specializations) (05%) 
The investigator sheet contains blank spaces for specializa­
tions of this skill, for example:  
i Acting  i Writer  
i Barber  i Morris Dancer  
i Calligraphy  i Opera Singer  
i Carpenter  i Painter and Decorator  
i Cook  i Photographer  
i Dancer  i Potter  
i Fine Art  i Sculptor  
i Forgery  i Vacuum Tube Blower  

Many of these examples are skills directly linked to a profession, but the skill may just be a leisure pursuit. You may spend skill points to purchase any skill specialization. The generic ‘Art and Craft’ skill cannot be purchased. 
Ability with this skill may enable the making or repair of an item—something typically requiring equipment and time, to be determined by the Keeper, if necessary. In a situation where grad­uations of success might be appropriate, a higher level of success indicates the item made is of high quality and/or precision. 

An art or craft skill might also be used to make a dupli­cate or fake item. In such a case, the difficulty level would depend on the intricacy and distinctiveness of the original to be copied. In the case of faking documentation, a specific specialization (Forgery) is used. 
A successful roll might provide information about an item, such as where or when it might have been made, some point of history or technique concerning it, or who might have made it. The holder of a specialism would have a breadth of knowledge within a particular field—knowledge of the subject, its history and contemporary practitioners, as well as the ability to perform it. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: making a standard, saleable item. 
i Hard difficulty: making a higher quality or particu­larly intricate piece. 
Pushing examples: reworking the object, piece or compo­sition from scratch; conducting further research; checking with another expert. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: A vast amount of time and money is wasted in creating a failed attempt; the audience or customer is highly offended or physically injured by some aspect of your work; the critics slate your work. and no one desires your services any longer. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she creates a transgressive work that shocks and causes violent reactions in the viewer—perhaps only the most decadent could appreciate it. 
Examples of Art and Craft Specializations 
Acting (05%): The performer is trained in theatrical and/ or film acting (in the modern era, this may also include television), able to adopt a persona, memorize scripts and utilize stage/movie make-up to alter their appearance. See Disguise (page @@). 
Fine Art (05%): The artist is accomplished in the art of painting (oils, acrylic, watercolor), as well as sketching in pencil, crayon or pastels. Whilst serious works of art might take many days or months to complete, the artist may quick­ly sketch accurate impressions, objects and people. The skill also denotes a familiarity with the ‘art world’, and the artist may be able to determine a particular artist’s work, their school and known history. 
Forgery (05%): Adept at fine detail, the user can produce high quality fake documents, be it a person’s handwriting, a bureaucratic form or permit, or a duplicate of a tome. The forger will require suitable materials (inks, grades of paper, etc.) as well as an original from which to copy. 
A successful roll indicates the forgery will pass a normal, cursory inspection. Someone spending time and thoroughly examining the forgery would use the Appraise skill (opposed by the original forger’s skill) when determining if the fake can be spotted. 
Photography (05%): Covers both still and motion photog­raphy. This skill allows one to take clear pictures, develop them properly and enhance half-hidden detail. 
In the 1920s, the user is able to prepare the necessary chemicals to make flashpowder . 
In the present day, the skill extends to cover video cam­eras, video playback equipment, digital photography and digital editing, where the user is adept at the manipulation of digital images. Radically different versions can be created from an original source, such as changing the location of a person in a photograph, who they are with and what they are doing. Those proficient may also be able to detect when an image has been manipulated. 
Regular snapshots do not require a skill roll. Rolls would be required to achieve effective candid photographs, or shots that capture fine detail—especially at long range, at speed or in low light. This skill can also allow the investiga­tor to determine if a photograph has been tampered with or fabricated, as well as the angle and position from which a photograph was taken. 
Artillery (01%) [Uncommon] 
This skill assumes some form of military training and ex­perience. The user is experienced in the operation of field weapons in warfare: able to work in a ‘crew’ or ‘detachment’ to operate the projection of munitions beyond the range of personal weapons. Many weapons of this nature are too large for a single person to operate, and either an individual cannot use the weapon without a crew or the difficulty level should be raised (at the Keeper’s discretion, dependent on the type of weapon employed). 

Various specializations exist, depending on the period setting of the game, including cannon, howitzer, mortar and rocket launcher. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: if the artillery is well maintained and used in favorable conditions. 
i Hard difficulty: if the artillery is poorly maintained or used in a rush and/or while under fire. 
Note: as a combat skill, this cannot be pushed. 

Charm (15%) 
Charm takes many forms, including physical attraction, seduction, flattery or simply warmth of personality. Charm may be used to compel someone to act in a certain way, but not in a manner completely contrary to that person’s normal behavior. Charm is opposed by the Charm or Psy­chology skills. 
Charm may be used for bargaining, to haggle the price of an item or service down. If successful, the seller is won over and they may well reduce the price a little. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
See Difficulty levels for Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate and Persuade, page @@. 
Pushing examples: overtly flattering the target with affec­tion; presenting an expensive gift; building trust by impart­ing a secret. 
Remember this is about being ‘charming’: if the investi­gator begins to take an alternative approach, the Keeper may ask for a different skill to be used; if threats are used, it may become Intimidation; or if a protracted discussion ensues, it may become Persuasion. Switching from one to the other to gain a second roll still constitutes a Pushed roll. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the target takes offence and will have nothing further to do with you; the target is associated in some way with your enemies and, whilst they may play along with you, they also inform on you; a third party intercedes to prevent you from chatting up their girl. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she falls head over heels in love with their target and will act as if the target had successfully used a Dominate spell (see Chapter 
12:Grimoire) upon them. 
Climb (20%) 
This skill allows a character to climb trees, walls and other vertical surfaces with or without ropes and climbing gear. The skill also encompasses abseiling. 
Conditions such as firmness of surface, available handholds, wind, visibility, rain, etc., may all affect the difficulty level. 

i Hard difficulty: few handholds, or surfaces slick with rain. 

Pushing examples: reassessing theInterpersonal Skills: climb; taking a longer route; straining one’s reach. 
Disambiguation 
Sample Consequences of failing a

The relative values in the Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate, and Persuade 
Pushed roll: fall and suffer damage 
skills serve to define a character and how they interact with people. 
(1D6 damage per ten feet on to grass, 

It is not for the player to nominate which one of these four skills 
or 1D10 damage per 10 feet on to 

they are using in a given situation. Instead the player should describe 
concrete); lose a valuable possession as 

what their investigator is doing and saying, and it is then up to the 
it falls from your pocket (you may not 
Keeper to decide which of the four skills is appropriate. 
notice this until later); become strand-
T If the investigator is threatening violence or acting aggressively,  
ed, unable to go up or down. 
the skill is Intimidate. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she holds on for dear 
T If the investigator is attempting to befriend or seduce, the skill 
life and screams at the top of their lungs 
is Charm. 
for as long as they can. 
T If the investigator is using rational arguments and debate over a prolonged time, the skill is Persuade. 
Computer Use (05%) 
T If the investigator is acting quickly to deceive, con or trick, the 
[Modern] 
skill is Fast Talk. 
This skill allows the investigator to pro­gram in various computer languages; 
When used on Player Characters 

retrieve and analyze obscure data; break Each player (normally) has only one investigator through which they into a secured system; explore a com­act in the game; it would therefore not be fair to allow one player to plicated network; or detect or exploit dictate the actions of another player’s investigator. However, if one intrusions, back doors and viruses. Spe­player wishes to put pressure on another player’s investigator to do their cial manipulation of a computer system bidding, they might use violence (combat rules) or their investigator’s may require this roll. social skills. The former could inflict damage and ultimately death; the The Internet places a wealth of in­latter is subtler. formation at the fingertips of an investi-
When one of these four skills is successfully used on an investigator gator. Use of the Internet to find highly (either by an NPC or another investigator), the player is not compelled specific and/or obscure information to follow the wishes of the other party. If the player refuses to act in may require a combined dice roll for accordance with the wishes of the character who is coercing them, the Computer Use and Library Use. latter can inflict one penalty die on one dice roll (of the coercer’s choice) This skill is not needed to use made by the player of the coerced investigator. This penalty die need computers when surfing the Internet, not be applied to the very next dice roll, but does not last indefinitely. collecting email or to run regular com-Only one penalty die can be held by one character against any other mercially available software. single character at a time. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: write, analyze and debug a computer pro­gramme. 

i Hard difficulty: decipher and Failing this skill on the first roll indicates that the climb hack into a secure network without 
is perhaps beyond the investigator’s capability. Failing a being identified or traced. pushed roll is likely to indicate a fall with resultant damage. One successful Climb roll should allow the investigator to Pushing examples: taking longer to develop a program; complete the climb in almost all cases (rather than requiring using another’s code as a shortcut; using untested software repeated rolls). A challenging or longer climb should have (e.g. a virus) to exploit a system. 
an increased difficulty level. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: accidentally Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
wiping the sought-after files, or even corrupting the whole i Regular difficulty: plenty of handholds; perhaps a system; leaving evidence or alerting others through your rope or drainpipe to climb. actions; infesting your own computer/network with a virus. If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she is 

lost in ‘cyberspace’, and it will require physical intervention to get the person to stop using the computer or look away from the screen. 
Credit Rating (0%) 
A measure of how prosperous and financially confident the investigator appears to be. Money opens doors; if the investigator is attempting to use his or her financial status to achieve a goal then use of the Credit Rating skill may be appropriate. Credit Rating can be used in place of APP to gauge first impressions. (i.e. the more wealthy tend to dress in more expensive clothing). 
Credit Rating is not so much a skill as a gauge of financial wealth, and should not be ticked as other skills are. A high Credit Rating can be a useful resource in play and so should be paid for with skill points when creating an investigator. Each occupation has a starting range for Credit Rating, and skill points should be spent to achieve a rating therein. 
Call of Cthulhu is not a game that requires money to be carefully tracked; however it is useful to know the bounds of an investigator’s finan­cial reach—for example, can the investigator afford to employ a team of ar­chaeologists and workers to excavate an Egyptian tomb? An investigator’s Credit Rating can change over time. Investigators of the Cthulhu Mythos are prone to insanity, and this may lead to loss of employ­ment and thus a lowering of the investigator’s Credit Rating score. See Credit Rating and Investigator Ex­penditure (page @@) for a more in depth study of Credit Rating and its use. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: getting a loan from a bank or business; bypassing a demand for credentials; gain­ing a line of credit in a store or casino; getting the best table in a fancy restaurant. 
i Hard difficulty: obtaining credit or a loan whilst implicated (or found guilty) in a criminal investiga­tion; gaining favorable attention after being vilified in the media. 
Pushing examples: you offer your house and/or other valu­ables to secure money from a loan shark; you attempt to pressure the bank manager in to giving you a loan. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the loan shark turns nasty and directs his boys to teach you a lesson; the bank manager calls the police; you are loaned the money, but it is a ploy to put you in deeper debt with a mobster who plans to buy out your debt and later call on you for a ‘favor’. 


If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she loses all faith in capitalism and begins freely handing out their money to passersby. 
(See "Living Standards" on page 56 for more details.) 
Cthulhu Mythos (0%) 
No starting investigator may take points in Cthulhu Mythos as a starting skill (unless agreed with the Keeper). There is no tick-box for Cthulhu Mythos on the investigator sheet, as successful use of the skill does not offer an increase in the investigator’s percentiles in the skill. Instead, points in Cthulhu Mythos are gained by encounters with the Mythos that result in insanity, by insane insights into the true nature of the universe, and by reading forbidden books and other Mythos writings. A character’s Sanity may never be higher than 99 minus his or her Cthulhu Mythos skill. As Cthulhu Mythos points proliferate, they crowd out Sanity points, and leave the 
investigator vulnerable. 
The Cthulhu Mythos 
skill is not founded on the 
accumulation of knowl­
edge as academic skills are. 
Rather, it represents the 
opening and tuning of the 
human mind to the Cthul­
hu Mythos. Thus, Cthulhu 
Mythos skill derived from 
encountering Deep Ones 
(for example) is transferable 
to other situations and entities. 
Also referred to as ‘that which man 
should not know’, the Cthulhu Mythos 
is antithetical to human understanding, 
and exposure to it undermines human sanity. 

Whenever spoor or other evidence of Mythos monsters is found, a successful roll against this skill allows the inves­tigator to identify the entity, deduce something about its behavior or guess at some property it may possess. A suc­cessful Cthulhu Mythos roll might also allow an investigator to remember some fact concerning the Mythos, identify a spell by seeing it cast, remember that a particular spell or piece of information may be found in a particular Mythos tome, or achieve some other task. The Cthulhu Mythos skill may also be used to manifest magical ‘spell-like’ effects. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
This skill begins at zero and often remains relatively low. The vast majority of skill rolls will be made at regular difficulty. 
i Regular difficulty: to correctly identify a mythos en­
tity based upon secondary evidence (spoor, wounds, 
firsthand accounts). 

i Hard difficulty: to identify a mythos entity based upon rumors, legends or minimal evidence; to identify a possible vulnerability or knowledge that grants some minor advantage over a mythos entity after thorough research and firsthand experience. 
Pushing examples: getting closer to the creature for a better view; consulting dread tomes or lore of humans (or otherwise) possessing specialist knowledge; conducting an autopsy to learn more; reading aloud as you retrace the strange cryptograms. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: get too close, exposing oneself to harm or suspicion; unwittingly read aloud a passage from a tome that activates a summon­ing spell; accidentally corrupt or destroy the evidence being studied. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she experiences a vision or revelation that reveals new truths about the Cthulhu Mythos, akin to an insane insight (with possible Cthulhu Mythos skill gain and/or associated Sanity loss)—see Insane Insight, page @@. 
Demolitions (01%) [Uncommon] 
With this skill the user is familiar in the safe use of dem­olitions, including setting and defusing explosive charges. Mines and similar devices are designed to be easy to set (no roll required) and more difficult to remove or defuse. 
This skill also encompasses military-grade demolitions (anti-personnel mines, plastique, etc.) 
Given enough time and resources, those proficient may rig charges to demolish a building, clear a blocked tunnel and repurpose explosive devises (such as constructing low­yield charges, booby-traps and so on). 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: to defuse an explosive device. To know where to place charges for greatest effect when destroying a bridge or building. 
i Hard difficulty: to defuse an explosive device in limited time. 
Pushing examples: taking until the very last second to de­fuse the bomb; double-checking all the circuits/connections by hand. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: if defusing or removing an explosive device, the consequence of failing a pushed roll is clear—it explodes! If using the Demolitions skill to place charges, the consequence of failing a pushed roll may be a failure to detonate at the right time (or at all), or that the detonation fails to have the desired effect (either too great or too little). 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she devises the most bizarre method of delivering the explosive, such as strapping it to a cat or themselves. 
Disguise (05%) 
To be used whenever you wish to appear to be someone oth­er than whom you are. The user changes posture, costume and/or voice to enact a disguise, posing as another person or another sort of person. Theatrical makeup may help, as will fake ID. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
There are two distinct aspects to this skill: either you are trying to conceal your true identity (such as when the police are looking for you) or you are impersonating someone else. 
i Regular difficulty: to convince strangers that you are 
who you say you are. For example, to return to the 
scene of a crime that you perpetrated yesterday and 
escape notice. 
i Hard difficulty: to convince professionals in a face­to-face meeting that you are who you say you are. For example, to pass as a bank employee to gain access to a bank vault. 
Note that to pass as a specific person in a face-to-face meeting with someone who knows the person being imi­tated is beyond the scope of this skill, and may well indicate the need for a combined skill roll at a higher difficulty (with Persuade, Charm or Fast Talk). 
Pushing examples: undergoing a fully immersive and intensive preparation (losing oneself in the ‘role’); stealing personal items and utilizing them in the disguise; overt ex­aggeration to confound the target; feigning a sudden attack of illness to disorientate the observer. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: Being arrested; causing offence, leading to violence or criminal charges; finding that the person being imitated is wanted by a criminal gang who come looking for vengeance. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, the investi­gator no longer recognizes his or her own face in the mirror, even when the disguise is removed. 
Diving (01%) [Uncommon] 
The user is trained in the use and maintenance of diving equipment for swimming underwater, including underwa­ter navigation, proper weighting and emergency procedures. 
Prior to the invention of the Aqua-Lung in 1942, rigid diving suits were worn with air pumped from the surface through a connecting tube. 
In the modern age, a scuba diver will be familiar with the physics of diving, air pressure and the physiological process­es that occur when breathing with pressurized air. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: routine dives using correct and well-maintained equipment. 
i Hard difficulty: diving in dangerous conditions or with poorly maintained equipment. 
Pushing examples: pushing the limits of the equipment; methodically double-checking equipment; gaining profes­sional assistance. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: become trapped underwater; attacked by sea creatures; suffer the bends. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she be­gins to understand whale-song; all you have to do is follow their instructions. 
Dodge (half DEX%) 
Allows an investigator to instinctively evade blows, thrown missiles and so forth. A character may attempt to use dodge any number of times in a combat round (but only once against a specific attack - see Chapter 6: Combat). Dodge can increase through experience, like other skills. If an attack can be seen, a character can try to dodge it. It is impossible to dodge bullets because they cannot be seen when in mo­tion; the best a character can do is to take evasive action that results in being harder to hit (“diving for cover”). 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
The Dodge skill is mostly used in combat as part of an op­posed roll and so no difficulty level is set. 
Note: as a combat skill, this cannot be pushed. 
Drive Auto (20%) 
Anyone with this skill can drive a car or light truck, make or­dinary maneuvers and cope with ordinary vehicle problems. If the investigator wants to lose a pursuer or tail someone, a Drive roll would be appropriate. 
Some other cultures might replace this skill with a comparative one; the Inuit might use Drive Dogsled or a Victorian might use Drive Carriage. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: to successfully weave through light traffic at speed to avoid pursuit. 
i Hard difficulty: to successfully weave through heavy traffic at speed to avoid pursuit. 
Pushing examples: driving the vehicle to its limit; not slow­ing down, regardless of the risk. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: Crashing; skidding to a halt, unable to proceed; being pursued by the police. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she will be found behind the wheel of a stationary vehicle making ‘brum-brum’ noises. 
Electrical Repair (10%) 
Enables the investigator to repair or reconfigure electrical equipment, such as auto ignitions, electric motors, fuse boxes, and burglar alarms. In the present day, this skill has little to do with Electronics. To fix an electrical device may require special parts or tools. Jobs in the 1920s may call for this skill and for Mechanical Repair in combination. 

Electrical Repair may also be used in conjunction with modern explosives, such as blasting caps, C-4 plastic explo­sives and mines. These weapons are designed to be easy to de­ploy; only a fumble result will lead to misfire (remember the roll can be Pushed). Defusing explosives is far trickier, as they may be fitted with anti-tamper mechanisms; raise the level of difficulty when disarming explosives—see Demolitions. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: repairing or creating a standard electrical device. 
i Hard difficulty: repairing something that is badly damaged; working without the proper tools. 

Pushing examples: taking longer to repair or reconfigure the equipment; taking a risky short cut. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: take dam­age from an electric shock; blow the fuses and plunge the building in to darkness; wreck the thing you are working on beyond repair. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she attempts to harness the electrical power of living organisms into the device. 
Electronics (01%) [Modern] 
For troubleshooting and repairing electronic equipment. Allows simple electronic devices to be made. This is a skill for the present day—use Physics and Electrical Repair for electronic developments of the 1920s. 
Unlike the Electrical Repair skill, parts needed for elec­tronics work often cannot be jury-rigged: they are designed for precise jobs. Often without the right microchip or circuit board, the skill-user is out of luck unless they can contrive some form of workaround. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Time is a factor in fabrication or repair, and the difficulty level should be lowered if time is unlimited, especially if the character has access to manuals and parts. 
If an investigator has the correct parts and instructions, putting together a standard computer should not even re­quire a skill roll. 
i Regular difficulty: repairing minor damage to a 
computer or electronic device — the kind of service 
one might expect under warranty. 
i Hard difficulty: use scavenged parts to jury-rig a tracking device to plant in someone’s car. 

Pushing examples: taking longer to construct or repair a device; researching new or other methodologies. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: fry circuitry or other delicate parts; take damage from electric shock; create a device that does something other than what was intended. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she becomes paranoid, convinced that every item they come across contains electronic bugging devices: the telephone, the television, the refrigerator. 
Fast Talk (05%) 
Fast Talk is specifically limited to verbal trickery, deception and misdirection, such as bamboozling a bouncer to let you inside a club, getting someone to sign a form they haven’t read, making a policeman look the other way, and so on. The skill is opposed by Psychology or Fast Talk. After a brief period (usually after the fast talker has left the scene) the target will realize that they have been conned. The effect is always temporary, though it will last longer if a higher level of success is achieved. 
Fast Talk may be used to haggle the price of an item or service down. If successful, the seller momentarily thinks that they have struck a good deal; however, if the buyer returns and attempts to purchase another item, the seller may well decide to refuse any further haggling and even increase the price in order to recoup what they lost on the previous sale! 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
See Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate and Persuade skills: setting the difficulty level, page @@. 
Pushing examples: getting up close and personal to the target; talking outlandishly, aiming to confuse the target. Remember this is Fast Talk, so if the investigator begins to take an alternative approach, the Keeper may ask for a different skill to be used; if threats are used, it may become Intimidate, or if a protracted discussion ensues, it may be­come Persuade. Switching from one to the other to gain a second roll still constitutes a Pushed roll. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: cause great offence leading to violence, outrage or criminal proceedings. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she begins hurling random abusive phrases at people. 
Fighting (Specializations) (varies %)
 Fighting skill denotes a character’s skill in melee combat. You may spend skill points to purchase any skill special­ization. The generic ‘Fighting’ skill cannot be purchased. Choose fighting specializations appropriate to your investi­gator’s occupation and history. 
Those starting the game with a Fighting (Brawl) skill of 50% or higher may wish to choose some type of formal training as part of their background to account for his or her skill level. A myriad of fighting styles exist, each with its own pros and cons. Martial arts are simply a way of developing a person’s Fighting skill. Decide how the character learned to fight, whether it be formal military training, martial arts classes, or learned the hard way as a result of street-fighting. The term brawl might feel too crude for a skilled martial artist and could be replaced (with ‘Karate’ for example) if a player so wished. 
Note: as a combat skill, this cannot be pushed. 
Fighting specializations: 
Axe (15%): use this skill for larger wood axes. A small hatch­et can be used with the basic brawling skill. If thrown, use Throw skill. 
Brawl (25%): includes all unarmed fighting and basic weapons that anyone could pick up and make use of, such as clubs (up to cricket bats or baseball bats), knives and many improvised weapons, such as bottles and chair legs. To de­termine the damage done with an improvised weapon, the Keeper should refer to the weapon chart and pick something comparable. 
Chainsaw (10%): the first gasoline-powered, mass produced chainsaw appeared in 1927, however earlier versions existed. 
Flail (10%): Nunchaku, morning stars and similar medieval weapons. 
Garrote (15%): any length of material used to strangle. Requires the victim to make a Fighting Maneuver to escape, or suffer 1D6 damage per round. 
Spear (20%): lances and spears. If thrown, use Throw skill. 
Sword (20%): all blades over two feet in length. 
Whip (05%): bolas and whips. 
Note: Thrown knives use the Throw skill. Weapons and their skill categories are listed in Table 
XVII: Weapons (pages @@-@@). The above specializations may not cover all weapons, but where possible try to fit other weapons into one of the above categories. Chainsaw is included as a weapon because of its use in numerous films, but players should note that the chance of a fumble is dou­bled and that they risk killing their investigator (or losing a limb) should this happen. 
Firearms (Specializations) (varies %)
 Covers all manner of firearms, as well as bows and cross­bows. You may spend skill points to purchase any skill spe­cialization. The generic ‘Firearms’ skill cannot be purchased. Choose specializations appropriate to your investigator’s occupation and history. 
Note: as a combat skill, this cannot be pushed. 
Firearms specializations: 
Bow (15%): use of bows and crossbows, ranging from medi­eval longbows to modern, high-powered compound bows. 
Handgun (20%): use for all pistol-like firearms when firing discrete shots. For machine pistols (MAC-11, Uzi, etc.) in Modern era games, use the Submachine Gun skill when firing bursts. 
Heavy Weapons (10%): use for grenade launchers, anti-tank rockets, etc. 
Flamethrower (10%): weapons projecting a stream of ig­nited flammable liquid or gas. May either be carried by the operator or mounted on a vehicle. 
Machine Gun (10%): weapons firing bursts from a bipod or tripod mounted weapon. If single shots are fired from a bipod, use Rifle skill. The differences between assault rifle, submachine gun and light machine gun are tenuous today. 
Rifle/Shotgun (25%): Rifle/Shotgun (25%): with this skill any type of rifle (whether lever-action, bolt-action or semi-automatic) or scatter-gun can be fired. Since the load from a shotgun expands in a spreading pattern, the user’s chance to hit does not decrease with range, but the damage dealt does. When an assault rifle fires a single shot (or mul­tiple singles) use this skill. 
Submachine Gun (15%): use this skill when firing any machine pistol or submachine gun; also for assault rifles set on burst. 
Note: Thrown knives use the Throw skill. 
Firearms are listed in the Table XVII: Weapons (pages @@-@@). 
First Aid (30%) 
The user is able to provide emergency medical care. This might encompass: applying a splint to a broken leg, stemming bleeding, treating a burn, resuscitating a drown­ing victim, dressing and cleaning a wound, etc. First Aid cannot be used to treat diseases (where the Medicine skill is required). 
To be effective, First Aid must be delivered within one hour, in which case it grants 1 hit point recovery. It may be attempted once, with subsequent attempts constituting a Pushed roll. Two people can work together to administer First Aid, with a success granted if either one of them rolls a success. Successful use of First Aid can rouse an uncon­scious person to consciousness. A character is limited to one successful treatment of both First Aid and Medicine until further damage is taken. 
When treating a dying character, successful First Aid stabilizes a dying character for one hour and grants 1 temporary hit point (lasting one hour, after which it fades). First Aid (and only First Aid) can save the life of a dying character, after which they must receive a successful Medicine roll or be hospitalized (within one hour), if this does not happen, the temporary hit point is lost and the character is dying. In the case of a dying character, a CON roll must be made at the end of each round; if the roll is failed, the character dies. If the character survives until the following round, First Aid can be attempted again (by up to two individuals). This can be contin­ued (without constituting a Pushed roll) until stabilization or death. Thus, First Aid is an im­portant skill to have, alongside Medicine, if you wish to be an all-round medic. 

Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Administering First Aid to a fellow human is always of Regular difficulty level. If one were treating an alien being whose physiology was unfamiliar, the difficulty level should be higher. 

Pushing examples: taking longer to treat the patient; em­ploying high risk methods to stabilize the wound. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: make things worse, causing an additional point of damage. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she feels compelled to ‘heal’ the person, even if it means ampu­tation or worse. In effect their endeavors constitute physical attacks which may lead to murder if they are not stopped. 
History (05%) 
Enables an investigator to remember the significance of a country, city, region or person, as pertinent. A successful roll might be used to help identify tools, techniques or ideas familiar to ancestors, but little known today. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: to recall some pertinent and useful information. 
i Hard difficulty: to know some obscure, detailed and useful information. 

Pushing examples: taking more time to examine; con­ducting further research; consulting another expert; hiring assistants to conduct detailed research, taking months, and at a huge cost. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: consul­tations alert your adversaries, who become aware of your intent; your facts are erroneous and lead you in to danger; much time and money is wasted on fruitless research. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she is convinced that they are somehow displaced in time, or perhaps they start believing they are living in a historic 
period, dressing and speaking in an archaic manner. 
Hypnosis (01%) [Uncommon] 
The user is able to induce a trancelike state in a willing target who experiences heightened suggestibility, relaxation and possible recall of forgotten memories. The limits of hyp­notism should be decided by the Keeper to fit their game; it may be that only willing subjects can be hypnotized, or 
the Keeper may allow it to be used on unwilling targets in a more aggres­sive manner. 


This skill may be utilized as hypnotherapy on those suffering mental trauma, reducing the effects of a phobia or mania in a patient (successful use means that the patient overcomes the phobia or mania on one occasion). Note that a series of successful hypnotherapy sessions may be needed to fully cure someone of a phobia (minimum of 1D6 ses­sions, at the Keeper’s discretion). 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Pushing examples: increasing your influence on the target by ensuring their full and undivided attention; assaulting the target’s senses with confusing lights or props; the use of drugs to make the target more susceptible to suggestion. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: some past memory or trauma is bought to the surface, causing the target 1D6 Sanity loss; the target falls into a trance, causing them to walk in front of a bus at a later time; the target’s mind (or the investigator’s mind) is temporarily emptied, allowing possession by a malevolent entity. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, his or her mind regresses to a childlike state until treatment is administered. 
Intimidate (15%) 
Intimidation can take many forms, including physical force, psychological manipulation and threats. It is used to fright­en or compel a person to act in a certain way. Intimidate is opposed by Intimidate or Psychology. 
Backing up intimidation with a weapon or some oth­er powerful threat or incentive may reduce the difficulty level. When Pushing an Intimidation roll, one possible consequence of failure is carrying out one’s threat, perhaps beyond the level of that which was intended. 
Intimidate may be used to force down the price of an item or service. If successful, the seller is may reduce the price, or hand the item over free of charge, but depending on the situation they may later report the incident to the police or to members of the local organized crime gang. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
See Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate and Persuade skills: setting the difficulty level, page @@. 
Pushing examples: Causing actual physical harm to the tar­get or to something or someone that the target cares about. Remember that this is Intimidation; if the investigator be­gins to take an alternative approach, the Keeper may ask for a different skill to be used. If the threats are retracted and the investigator then tries to befriend the target, it may become Charm; or if a protracted and unthreatening discussion ensues, it may become Persuade. Switching from one to the other to gain a second roll still constitutes a Pushed roll. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: accidentally pulling the trigger of the gun you’re waving in the target’s face; the target’s mind snaps, resulting in violence or inane babbling, after which no more can be gained; the target simply laughs in your face and won’t break no matter what you do; the target somehow turns the tables and intimidates the intimidator. 
It is important to note that Pushing an Intimidate roll means taking things to the limit. This could involve days of interrogation, or an ultimatum with a gun to the head. Ei­ther way, a Pushed roll either gains the required information or renders some kind of end to the situation. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she be­comes intensely fearful of the target and does their bidding. 
Jump (20%) 
With success, the investigator may leap up or down verti­cally, or jump horizontally from a standing or running start. When falling, Jump may be used to lessen the potential fall damage. 
Judgment must be exercised as to what constitutes a reg­ular jump, a difficult jump or an extreme jump (respectively requiring Regular success, Hard success and Extreme suc­cess). As a guide, a regular success would be required for an investigator to safely leap down vertically to his or her own height, jump horizontally from a standing start across a gap for a distance equal to the jumper’s own height, or run and then jump horizontally to a distance of twice the jumper’s own height. One might achieve double this distance with an Extreme success, although bear in mind the world record for the long jump is around 29 feet.
 If falling from a height, a successful Jump prepares for the fall, reducing resultant damage by half. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: safely leap down vertically a distance equal to the jumper’s own height; jump horizontally from a standing start, across a gap for a distance equal to the jumper’s own height; run and then jump horizontally to a distance of twice the jumper’s own height. 
i Hard difficulty: as for a regular difficulty but increase distances by 50%; perhaps attempting to jump from a rooftop and through the window of a neighboring building across the alley. 
Pushing examples: Delaying and taking time to assess the jump; throwing all your weight and force behind the jump—really stretching for it. In some instances a Pushed roll is not possible; if one leaps across an abyss one cannot have a second attempt. However, if one is trapped in a pit and jumping to escape, one could have any number of at­tempts, which would then be summarized by one Pushed skill roll. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: fall and suffer physical harm; achieve the jump but a valuable pos­session (of the Keeper’s choice) is dropped in the process. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she will become convinced that they can fly. 
Language, Other (Specializations) (01%) 
When choosing this skill, the exact language must be spec­ified and written against the skill. An individual can know any number of languages. The skill represents the user’s chance to understand, speak, read and write in a language other than his or her own. 
Ancient or unknown languages (such as Aklo, Hyper­borean, etc.) should not be chosen (unless agreed with the Keeper), but ordinary earthly languages may be. The Keeper may raise the difficulty level if archaic speech or writing in that language is encountered. A single successful Other Language roll normally comprehends an entire book. 
Suggestions regarding the Other Languages skill: 
i At 5% skill a language can be correctly identified without need for a roll. 
i At 10% skill simple ideas can be communicated. 
i At 30% transactional requests can be understood. 
i At 50% skill a person is fluent. 
i At 75% skill in a character can pass for a native speaker of a foreign language. 
i To identify a present-day human language (un­known to the investigator), use a Know roll. 
i To identify an extinct human language, use an Ar­chaeology or History roll. 
i To identify an alien language, use a Cthulhu Mythos or possibly an Occult roll. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Regular conversation, perhaps with pauses for clarification (when speaking to a less than fluent foreign speaker) does not require a roll for those who are fluent. 
i Regular difficulty: conversation (perhaps at speed); 
written material containing a few technical or un­
common terms. 
i Hard difficulty: high content of unusual technical terms; historically archaic phrases; speaker has unusual dialect. 
Pushing examples: taking longer to think through the words you want to say; taking long pauses to answer what you have been told; referencing other books to make a translation. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: exaggerated or loud discussions between investigators and third parties alert some enemy faction to the investigators’ intentions; a word or phrase is misunderstood (perhaps the meaning is reversed); the listener takes offense to an unintentional slur, and they respond with their fists, or turn everyone in the neighborhood against you. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she begins to speak in tongues, or imagines that they are using the Enochian language 

Language (Own) (EDU%) 
When choosing this skill, the exact language must be specified and written against the skill. In infancy and early childhood, most humans use a single language. The tongue chosen by the player for the Own Language automatically starts as equal to the investigator’s EDU characteristic; thereafter the investigator understands, speaks, reads and writes at that percentage or higher (if further skill points are added during investigator creation). 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Normally no skill roll is necessary to use Own Language. Even when technical, archaic or esoteric terms are used, if both parties are sympathetic to each other and there is suf­ficient time for conversation, most things should be covered without a die roll. 
If a document is extremely difficult to read or in an archaic dialect, the Keeper may require a roll.
 Pushing examples: see Language (Other) above. 

Law (05%) 
Represents the chance of knowing pertinent law, precedent, legal maneuvers or court procedure. The practice of law as a profession can lead to great rewards and political office, but it requires intense application over many years—a high Credit Rating is also usually crucial in this regard. In the United States, the State Bar of a particular commonwealth or state must sanction one’s practice of law. 
When in a foreign country, it is suggested that the level of difficulty be increased when using this skill, unless the character has spent many months studying that nation’s legal system. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty level: understanding and utilizing the details of a relevant law or legal procedure. 
i Hard difficulty: remembering or understanding an obscure legal precedent, or cross-examining a highly competent hostile witness. 

Pushing examples: delaying to consider your argument; explaining in high detail the nuances of the case/situation; taking significant time to conduct research; bending the letter of the law to drive your argument. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: misinter­preting a law or stepping outside of the accepted legal proce­dure leads you to break the law and draws police attention; wasting valuable time and money on research and legal fees; you are held in contempt of court and thrown in the cells for at least 24 hours. 
If a Pushed roll is failed, an insane investigator will now believe that he or she is above the law. 



Library Use (20%) 
Library Use enables an investigator to find a piece of infor­mation, such as a certain book, newspaper or reference in a library, collection of documents or database, assuming the item is there. Use of this skill marks several hours of contin­uous search. 
This skill can locate a locked case or rare-book special collection, but Persuade, Fast Talk, Charm, Intimidate, Credit Rating or special credentials may have to be used to get access to the books or information in question. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: locating a book or piece of infor­mation in a library. 
i Hard difficulty: identifying piece of information in a disorganized library, or if you are extremely pressed for time. 
Pushing examples: pressing the librarian for extensive as­sistance; taking longer to systematically work through the stacks. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: finding a similar book, containing misleading information, which will lead the investigators in to danger; entanglement with an adversary—perhaps they are alerted to your research and act against you, or they check out book you are searching for (or simply tear out the pages in question); getting in to an argument with the librarian, resulting in your library membership being revoked. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she hoards books, cutting out pages to stick to their bedroom wall, making copious bizarre notes, linking the pages with threads of cotton and pins. Alternatively, the investigator is obsessed with finding the ‘correct’ book or piece of information, spending all of their time pilfering and poring over books. 
Listen (20%) 
Measures the ability of an investigator to interpret and un­derstand sound, including overheard conversations, mutters behind a closed door and whispered words in a cafe. The Keeper may use it to determine the course of an impending encounter: was your investigator awakened by that cracking twig? By extension, a high Listen skill can indicate a good level of general awareness in a character. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Listen can be opposed by Stealth when someone is creeping up on you. 
i Regular difficulty: hearing something approaching 
you (with a Stealth skill of below 50); eavesdropping 
on a nearby conversation. 

i Hard difficulty: hearing something creep up on you (with a Stealth skill of 50 to 89); eavesdropping on whispered conversation. 
Library Use will turn up shocking clues. 

Pushing examples: stopping dead still and listening; getting closer to the presumed source (e.g. putting your ear to the train track or the door); telling everyone to be quiet (mak­ing a noise yourself) and then listening. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the ‘thing’ has caught you unawares (you are surprised); you misheard the conversation and get the facts mixed up; you are caught trying to eavesdrop, and find yourself in a very embarrassing predicament. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she be­comes overly sensitive to all sounds and is unable to operate without earplugs or similar. 
Locksmith (01%) 
A locksmith can open car doors, hot-wire autos, jimmy library windows, figure out Chinese puzzle boxes and penetrate ordinary commercial alarm systems. The user may repair locks, make keys or open locks with the aid of skeleton keys, picks and other tools. Especially difficult locks may be of a higher difficulty level. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: opening or repairing a standard lock. 
i Hard difficulty: opening a high security lock. 
Pushing examples: completely dismantling the lock; taking longer; using force to pry the mechanism. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the lock is damaged beyond repair (perhaps your lock pick has snapped off inside the lock); you break the puzzle box (perhaps only smashing it will open it now); you trip an alarm, or make enough noise for someone or something to come looking… 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she gives up on the lock in question and realizes the higher purpose of unlocking their own mind; a veil has been lifted from their eyes, and they see the world in a new way that makes complete sense to them, but no sense to anyone of sound mind. 
Lore (01%) (Specializations) [Uncommon] 
This skill represents a character’s expert understanding of a subject that falls outside the normal bounds of human knowledge. Specializations of Lore should be specific and unusual, such as: 
i Dream Lore 
i Necronomicon Lore (e.g. history of) 
i UFO Lore 
i Vampire Lore 
i Werewolf Lore 
i Yaddithian Lore 
Where the Keeper wishes to test an investigator’s knowl­edge of something that falls within the bounds of one of these fields of Lore, but the investigator lacks the relevant Lore specialization, the Keeper may for allow for another (more general) skill to be used but require a higher level of success. For example, if the Keeper were testing a mod­ern-day investigator’s knowledge of alien abductions in the 1980s, he or she could ask for either a Regular success using UFO Lore or a Hard success using History. 
Lore skills are also used as a shorthand method of com­municating the knowledge of a non-player character to the Keeper. In the main, knowledge is represented by the EDU characteristic and specific skills, such as History or Cthul­hu Mythos. The Keeper should decide when the Lore skill should be incorporated into the game—usually only when a particular area of specialist knowledge is central to the campaign being played. 
Mechanical Repair (10%) 
This allows the investigator to repair a broken machine or to create a new one. Basic carpentry and plumbing projects can be performed, as well as constructing items (such as pulley system) and repairing items (such as a steam pump). Special tools or parts may be required. This skill can be used to open common household locks, but nothing more advanced—see the Locksmith skill for more complex locks. Mechanical Repair is a companion skill to Electrical Repair, and both may be necessary to fix complex devices, such as a car or an aircraft. 

Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: repair or create a simple device; open a basic lock. 
i Hard difficulty: repair a very badly damaged device; create a complex device with limited resources. 

Pushing examples: completely dismantling the device; taking longer; risk using excessive force to ‘knock’ the device into action (e.g. hitting the thing till it works). 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you have broken the device beyond repair; you hurt yourself whilst working on the device (perhaps cutting your hand, etc.); you become obsessed with the device and find you have spent the whole day and night working on it. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she fills a telephone directory sized notepad with scribbled designs, culminating in the creation of a bizarre device using organic matter and household appliances. 
Medicine (01%) 
The user diagnoses and treats accidents, injuries, diseases, poisonings, etc., and makes public health recommenda­tions. If an era has no good treatment for a malady, the effort is limited, uncertain, or inconclusive. The Medicine skill grants knowledge of a wide variety of drugs and po­tions, natural and man-made, and understanding of the side effects and contraindications. 
Treatment using the Medicine skill takes a minimum of one hour and can be delivered any time after damage is taken, but if this is not performed on the same day, the diffi­culty level is increased (requiring a Hard success). A person treated successfully with Medicine recovers 1D3 hit points (in addition to any First Aid they have received), except in the case of a dying character, which must initially receive successful First Aid to stabilized them before a Medicine roll is made. 
A character is limited to one treatment of both First Aid and Medicine until further damage is taken. Successful use of Medicine can rouse an unconscious person to conscious­ness. 
In treating Major Wounds, successful use of the Medi­cine skill provides the patient a Bonus die on their weekly recovery roll. 
The Keeper may grant automatic success for medical treatment in a contemporary, well-equipped hospital. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: diagnosis and treatment of standard medical ailments, with access to equipment (at least a doctor’s bag containing drugs and instruments) and a suitable environment. 
i Hard difficulty: diagnosis and treatment in a dirty and unsafe environment, with the minimum of equipment. 
Pushing examples: consulting with colleagues; conducting further research; trying something experimental or more risky; performing some form of clinical experiment. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you misdi­agnose the ailment and you worsen the patient’s condition (perhaps even killing them); your good standing comes into question and you are investigated for malpractice. In the case of a dying character, if a Pushed Medicine roll is failed, the patient dies. 
If an insane investigator fails a Pushed roll, the results will be disturbing in the extreme, perhaps involving ampu­tation or blood poisoning as a result of failed attempts to graft animal parts to the person. 
Natural World (10%) 
Originally the study of plant and animal life in its envi­ronment. By the nineteenth century, this study had long separated into a range of academic disciplines (e.g. Biology, Botany, etc.) As a skill, Natural World represents the tradi­tional (unscientific) knowledge and personal observation of farmers, fishermen, inspired amateurs and hobbyists. It can identify species, habits and habitats in a general way, and identify tracks, spoors and calls, as well as allowing guesses as to what may be important to a particular species. For a scientific understanding of the natural world, one should look to the Biology, Botany and Zoology skills. 
Natural World may or may not be accurate—this is the region of appreciation, judgment, folk tradition and enthu­siasm. Use Natural World to judge horseflesh at the county fair, or decide whether a butterfly collection is excellent or just excellently framed. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: identifying a particular species; remembering some common lore; knowing the best place to catch some fish. 
i Hard difficulty: identifying an unusual specimen; locating a rare species of plant or animal; remem­bering a very obscure fact or piece of lore. 
Pushing examples: spending much longer (forgetful of the time) examining the habitat; tasting the unknown mush­room or plant to get a better idea what it is; consulting with the old woman in the village about the local wildlife. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you spend long hours obsessively poring over books to identify the species; you get the facts wrong, and instead of the wasps be­ing repelled by your concoction of swamp mud and herbs, they are drawn to you (with painful results); you picked the wrong mushroom and find yourself, hours later, walking naked towards a policeman. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she goes native and will be lost in the wilderness until friends come to their aid. 
Navigate (10%) 
Allows the user to find his or her way in storms or clear weather, in day or at night. Those of higher skill are familiar with astronomical tables, charts, instruments and satellite location gear, as they exist in the era of play. One could also use this skill to measure and map an area (cartography), whether an island of many square miles or the interior of a single room—use of modern technology may lower or negate the difficultly level. 
Rolls for this skill may be made as concealed rolls by the Keeper—a matter for the investigators to attempt, and later witness the results. 
If the character is familiar with the area, a bonus die should be granted to the roll. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: keep on the right route; use the sun and stars to identify compass positions; map a small area of terrain. 
i Hard difficulty: head in the right direction when there is no clear route or landmarks; map a large area of complex terrain. 
Pushing examples: getting the map out and delaying whilst you attempt to work out where you are; going back to where you started from and trying again. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you get lost and find yourself being watched or ambushed by a bear; you go round and round in circles, and your companions stop following you (you’re on your own now…); you mistake the stars, and rather than getting away from the cultist’s search parties, you end up back at the cult’s hidden base. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she throws away the map (as happens in The Blair Witch Project) and follows their intuition. Their intuition does not work. 
Occult (05%) 
The user recognizes occult paraphernalia, words and con­cepts, as well as folk traditions, and can identify grimoires of magic and occult codes. The occultist is familiar with the families of secret knowledge passed down from Egypt and Sumer, from the Medieval and Renaissance West, and perhaps from Asia and Africa as well. 
Comprehending certain books may provide percentiles of Occult. This skill does not apply to spells, books and magic of the Cthulhu Mythos, although worshipers of the Great Old Ones often adopt occult ideas. 
Whether non-Mythos magic is real or fraudulent in your game is for the Keeper to determine (see Chapter 9: Magic). 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: recall information from folklore or occult theories; understand the meaning of tarot cards or other divination techniques. 
i Hard difficulty: identify rare or unique occult tomes; re­call the finer details of secret occult practices and rituals. 
Pushing examples: taking more time to study the site or item; conducting further research; consulting another expert; purging oneself and undertaking extreme personal preparation in advance of ritual performance. 

Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: information is misremembered, and the ritual is performed incorrectly with disastrous consequences (perhaps the house is burned to the ground); in preparing the circle of protection, you use the wrong ingredients, and rather than ward off the spirits you genuinely summon something malevolent; your research has uncovered a hitherto unknown Mythos link, and your realization shatters your mind (SAN loss). 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, this is likely to manifest in some form on obsession; perhaps the inves­tigator tattoos occult symbols upon his or her cheeks and palms, or cannot act without first using a scrying crystal to divine their future. 
Operate Heavy Machinery (01%) 
Required to drive and operate a tank, backhoe, steam shovel or other large-scale construction machine. For very different sorts of machines, the Keeper may decide to raise the difficulty level if the problems encountered are mostly unfamiliar ones; someone used to running a bulldozer, for instance, will not be quickly competent with the steam tur­bines in a ship’s engine room.
 Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: operate a crane or road digger. 
i Hard difficulty: manipulate the machinery to achieve some delicate or specific task, such as un­earthing delicate dinosaur eggs with a mechanical digger without breaking them. 
Pushing examples: going step-by-step with the operating manual; taking time to practice; seeking a teacher. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you’re driv­ing the bulldozer, but get overconfident, and lose control so it veers into a brick wall (the wall comes down on you, or perhaps worse). 

If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she may believe they are tasked with unearthing or building a temple to the old ones. 
Persuade (10%) 
Use Persuade to convince a target about a particular idea, concept or belief through reasoned argument, debate and discussion. Persuade may be employed without reference to truth. The successful application of Persuade takes time: at least half an hour. If you want to persuade someone quickly, you should use Fast Talk. 
Depending on the goal expressed by the player, if the investigator takes sufficient time, the effect may linger indef­initely and insidiously; for years perhaps, until events or an­other Persuade turn the target’s mind in another direction. 
Persuade may be used for bargaining, to haggle the price of an item or service down. If successful, the seller is thor­oughly convinced that they have struck a good deal. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
See Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate and Persuade skills: setting the difficulty level, page @@. 
Pushing examples: getting close and personal to advance your argument or appeal to the target’s reason; demon­strating through logical reasoning and examples, in detail; using carefully preplanned suggestion techniques (possibly also subliminal messages) to make the target as receptive as possible; putting on a grand show (staging, fireworks, free gifts, free drinks, bribes, etc.) in order to really push your point of view front and center for a group of people. 
Remember that this is Persuade; if the investigator be­gins to take an alternative approach, the Keeper may ask for a different skill to be used. If threats are used, it may become Intimidate; or if the investigator is relying on befriending the target, it may become Charm. Switching from one to the other to gain a second roll still constitutes a Pushed roll. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the target takes great offence and refuses to have any more to do with you; your bribe worked and the target signed the forms—however in the cold light of morning they feel they have been duped, and now their solicitor has employed a private eye to find out what you’re up to, or is suing you for malpractice; the target doesn’t like your big talk and, from out of nowhere, they pull a knife on you; you persuaded the security guard to turn a blind eye to your robbery—however they lose their job and, wracked with guilt, they commit sui­cide (the full implications of your actions hit you and you lose Sanity for causing the death of an innocent). 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, they may be found later on a street corner trying to convince passersby of their argument or bizarre point of view. 
Pilot (Specializations) (01%) 
The air or water equivalent of Drive Automobile, this is the maneuver skill for flying or floating craft. You may spend skill points to purchase any skill specialization. The generic ‘Pilot’ skill cannot be purchased. An investigator might have several versions of this skill in the spaces on the investigator sheet (such as Pilot Aircraft, Pilot Dirigible, etc.) Each starts at 01%. 
Anyone with modest skill can sail or fly on a calm day with good visibility, although skill rolls are required for storms, navigation by instrument, low visibility and other difficult situations. Bad weather, poor visibility and damage may raise the difficulty level of skill rolls to pilot air and water craft. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: make an emergency landing with a light aircraft in a farmer’s field. 
i Hard difficulty: pilot the craft in very poor condi­tions (e.g. extremely bad weather, faulty equipment). 
Pushing examples: pulling the aircraft up and making a second and final attempt at landing; pushing the vehicle to its limit; making a risky maneuver to lose a pursuer. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the results of a failed roll should fit the situation. It may be that the craft is somehow damaged, and repairs will have to be made before it can be used again (which may prove impossible in remote locations); passengers are injured during the maneuver or accident; you emergency-landed the plane in the jungle, and awake tied to large stones that circle a huge, bubbling cooking pot. Reserve burning wrecks for excep­tional circumstances, such as when the pilot is insane, or when taking a crazy risk at high speed. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she will believe that they are capable of death-defying stunts. They are not. 
Piloting specializations: 
Pilot (Aircraft): understands and is increasingly competent with a general class of aircraft named below. Upon any landing, even under the best conditions, a Pilot roll must be made. The consequence of failure is situation-dependent. Failing a (Pushed) skill roll to land in a flat, grassy field on a calm summer’s day may simply indicate a bumpy landing, perhaps deterring more delicate passengers from flying again. At the other extreme, failing a (Pushed) skill roll to land on icy tundra during a storm may well result in the de­struction of the airplane and death or injury of all involved. Failure commonly represents damage to the craft, which must be repaired before the next take-off. A result of 100 is a memorable disaster. 
Each class of aircraft counts as a different skill and should be listed independently, or as the Keeper sees fit. 1920s: Pilot Balloon/Dirigible/Civil Prop only. Present day: Pilot Civil Prop, Pilot Civil Jet, Pilot Airliner, Pilot Jet Fighter, Pilot Helicopter. Piloting skill may be transferred to an alternative form of aircraft, but the level of difficulty may be increased. Pilot (Boat): understands the behavior of small motor and sailing craft in wind, storms and tides, and can read wave and wind action to suggest hidden obstacles and approach­ing storms. In a wind, novice sailors will find docking a rowboat difficult. 
Psychoanalysis (01%) 
The skill refers to the range of emotional therapies, not just to Freudian procedures. Formal psychotherapy was still in its infancy in the 1890s, though some procedures are as old as humanity. Sometimes it was looked on as a fraudulent study even in the 1920s. The common term then for an an­alyst or scholar of emotional disorders was ‘alienist’. In the present day, a combination of therapies has evolved, and this skill now could be justly named Psychiatric Treatment. 
Intensive psychoanalysis can return Sanity points to an investigator patient. Once per game month, to learn the progress of the therapy, make a 1D100 roll against the analyst or doctor’s Psychoanalysis skill. If the roll succeeds, the patient gains 1D3 Sanity points. If the roll fails, add no points. If the roll is fumbled, then the patient loses 1D6 Sanity points, and treatment by that analyst concludes: there has been some sort of serious incident or dramatic setback in the therapy, and the relationship between patient and therapist has broken down beyond saving. 
In the game, psychoanalysis alone does not speed recov­ery from indefinite insanity, which requires 1D6 months of institutional (or similar) care, of which psychotherapy may form a part. 
Successful use of this skill can allow another person to cope with the subject of their phobia for a short time, or to see delusions for what they are. In play this would allow for an insane investigator to ignore the effects of a phobia or mania for a brief period, allowing a claustrophobe to hide in a broom cupboard for ten minutes, for example. Equally a person might make a Psychoanalysis roll to help a delusional investigator see through their hallucination for a brief period. 
Treatment by a psychotherapist can add Sanity points during indefinite insanity (see Sanity, page @@). 
Psychoanalysis cannot increase a person’s Sanity points above 99–Cthulhu Mythos. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: standard therapy within a hospi­tal setting. 
i Hard difficulty: intermittent therapy over a longer period. 
Pushing examples: this is a skill, which can be attempted month after month without requiring a Pushed skill roll. However, if one failed the skill roll in a given month, one might choose to push a roll during a single session on the following day with some form of radical intervention (if a quick result was required). For example, forcing a patient to ‘face’ their fear by actively forcing them to confront its phys­ical reality; getting the patient’s friends and close colleagues to actively participate in the therapy. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: curing the patient’s fear of spiders by locking them in a room full of tarantulas backfires as the patient goes berserk (possible damage to self and to others) and now thinks they are the ‘spider king’ (the patient now has a new mania and has lost additional Sanity points—the therapist should make a San­ity roll too, as their actions caused this!) 
Much like the blind leading the blind, it is possible for an insane character to practice psychoanalysis. An insane character who fails a pushed roll could seek to become a cult leader, with his or her patients as recruits. 
Psychology (10%) 
A perception skill common to all humans, it allows the user to study an individual and form an idea of another person’s motives and character. The Keeper may choose to make concealed Psychology skill rolls on the player’s behalf, announcing only the information, true or false, that the user gained by employing it. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Psychology can be used to oppose all forms of social inter­action rolls: Intimidate, Fast Talk, Persuade and Charm. It can also be used to see through someone’s disguise (such as when using the Disguise skill). 
i Regular difficulty: read someone’s intent or deter­
mine if the person is lying if their relevant skill (In­
timidate, Fast Talk, Persuade and Charm) is below 
50%. 
i Hard difficulty: read someone’s intent or determine if the person is lying if their relevant skill (Intim­idate, Fast Talk, Persuade and Charm) is between 50% and 89%. 
Pushing examples: being very unsubtle and asking highly personal, intimate or downright direct questions of the tar­get; immersing yourself in data regarding a specific person (the target of your study) in order to think like them and understand their motivations. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you some­how reveal your own motivations to the target; the target is offended by your prying questions or curious stare, and refuses to speak with you further, or takes action against you (perhaps violence or a call to the police); unknown to you, the target is connected with your adversaries, and you unwittingly reveal your own agenda to them; spending all week locked in your room in order to build the profile has left you a physical and mental wreck (penalty die to all rolls until you recover). 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she be­lieves that they hear the target’s evil thoughts, and launches a physical attack upon them. 
Read Lips (01%) [Uncommon] 
This skill allows the inquisitive investigator to ‘listen in’ on a conversation, without requiring them to hear the speakers. Line of sight is necessary, and if only one speaker’s lips can be seen (the other presumably with their back to the lip reader) then only ‘half ’ of the conversation can be deciphered. 

Read Lips may also be used to silently communicate with another person (if both are proficient), allowing for relatively complex phrasing and meaning. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Depending on the situation, Read Lips is usually unop­posed. If attempting to read the lips of a target who wishes to remain hidden or unobserved, the skill may be opposed by the Stealth of the target. 
i Regular difficulty: understand the spoken commu­
nication of a person who is in clear sight and in 
relatively close proximity. 
i Hard difficulty: determine the spoken commu­nication of a person whose mouth is occasionally obscured and/or is some distance away (e.g. in a large crowd of people). 

Pushing examples: putting yourself in an obvious position and staring unsubtly at the target(s); filming the target (and thus likely to be observed filming the target). 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the target becomes aware that you are watching them intently, and takes offense and confronts you; the drunken man across the bar is angered, mistakenly thinking that you are looking at him, and punches you; you are so intent on the target that you miss what is happening in your close proximity (someone steals your case, or you walk into a lamp post). 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, there is plen­ty of scope for imagining all manner of strange and bizarre things being said. 
Ride (05%) 
This skill is intended to apply to saddle horses, donkeys or mules, and grants knowledge of basic care of the riding animal, riding gear, and how to handle the steed at a gallop or on difficult terrain. Should a steed unexpectedly rear or stumble, the rider’s chance of remaining mounted equals his or her Ride skill. Riding side-saddle increases the level of difficulty by one level. An unfamiliar mount (such as a cam­el) might be ridden successfully, but the level of difficulty would be higher. 
If an investigator falls from a mount, either because the animal has collapsed, fallen or died (or because a pushed Ride roll failed), at least 1D6 hit points are lost in the acci­dent—although a Jump roll can negate this loss. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Basic animal handling or riding a mount at walking pace does not require a ride roll. i Regular difficulty: riding at speed; holding on to a scared mount. 
i Hard difficulty: riding a mount at speed in rough, unfamiliar terrain where weather conditions are poor (e.g. a heavily wooded forest at night in the pouring rain). 
74 
Pushing examples: whipping or pushing the mount aggres­sively—perhaps forcing a horse to jump a ravine or high ditch; taking the risk of keeping your mount rather than jumping clear as trouble approaches. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: rider is thrown from mount and takes falling damage; mount is injured; rider’s foot is entangled in the mount’s bridle and the rider ends up being dragged for some distance. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she becomes obsessed with the animal. 
Science (Specializations) (01%) 
Practical and theoretical ability with a science specialty would suggest some degree of formalized education and training, although a well-read amateur scientist may also be a possibility. Understanding and scope is limited by the era of play. You may spend skill points to purchase any skill spe­cialization. The generic ‘Science’ skill cannot be purchased. 
Each specialty covers a particular discipline and the list given is not exhaustive. Many specialties cross and overlap in knowledge, for example Mathematics and Cryptography, Botany and Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy. When a character does not have the obvious discipline specialty, they may roll against an allied specialty with the level of difficulty increased (or penalty die) at the Keeper’s discretion. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
i Regular difficulty: conducting an experiment; being aware of current scientific theory within your field of specialty: working with proper equipment. 
i Hard difficulty: conducting a particularly demanding experiment; deciphering disorganized/partial scien­tific records; working with improvised equipment. 
Pushing examples: taking more time for study; conducting further research (perhaps in a better-equipped laboratory); consulting another expert; taking risks. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the exper­iment goes completely awry, causing unforeseen damage (explosion, fire, electrical shock, expulsion to the sixth dimension, etc.); you misinterpret the information and so incorrectly prepare the formulae for the ‘magical’ powder, with disastrous results. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she begins to explore an aspect of weird science related to their specialization. This may ultimately lead to actual developments akin to those of Crawford Tillinghast (from Lovecraft’s story From Beyond). 
Science Specializations: 
Astronomy (01%): The user knows how to find out which stars and planets are overhead at a particular day or hour of the day or night, when eclipses and meteor showers occur, and the names of important stars. The skill also provides knowledge of current perceptions about life on other worlds, the existence or the formation of galaxies, and so on. An academic might be able to calculate orbits, discuss stellar life cycles and (in the modern day), have knowledge of infrared astronomy or long-baseline interferometry. 

Biology (01%): The study of life and living organisms, in­cluding cytology, ecology, genetics, histology, microbiology, physiology and so on. With this skill one might develop a vaccine against some hideous Mythos bacterium, isolate the hallucinogenic properties of some jungle plant, or perform analysis of blood and/or organic matter. 
Botany (01%): The study of plant life, including classifica­tion of species, structure, growth, reproduction, chemical properties, evolutionary principles, diseases and microscopy. Sub-disciplines of botany include agronomy, forestry, hor­ticulture and paleobotany. With this skill one might identify the properties of a particular plant (whether poisonous, edible or psychotropic for example) and its particular uses. 
Chemistry (01%): A study of the composition of sub­stances, the effects of temperature, energy, and pressure upon them, as well as how they affect one another. With chemistry, one might create or extract complex chemical compounds, including simple explosives, poisons, gases and acids, requiring at least a day or so with the proper equipment and chemicals. The user could also analyze an unknown substance, given proper equipment and reagents. 
Cryptography (01%): The study of secret codes and languag­es developed by one or more persons to conceal the contents of a conversation or message. A specialized branch of math­ematics, this skill enables the identification, creation and/or deciphering of a code. Codes are usually written, but may take other forms, such as a message hidden within a musical composition, graphic art or computer coding (in modern day settings). Cracking a code can be painstaking work, often requiring lengthy research and number crunching. 
Engineering (01%): While technically not a science, it is grouped here for convenience. Science is about identifying certain phenomenon (through observing and recording), whereas engineering takes such findings and uses them to produce practical applications, such as machines, structures and materials. 
Forensics (01%): The analysis and identification of evi­dence. Normally associated with crime scene investigation (examination of fingerprints, DNA, hair and body fluids) and laboratory work in order to determine fact and provide expert witness and evidence for legal disputes. 
Geology (01%): Used to determine the approximate age of rock strata, recognize fossil types, distinguish minerals and crystals, locate promising sites for drilling or mining, eval­uate soils, anticipate volcanism, seismic events, avalanches and other such phenomena. 
Mathematics (10%): The study of numbers and logic, in­cluding mathematical theories and applied and theoretical solution design and development. The skill might allow the identification of non-Euclidian geometries, solve puzzling formulae and decrypt complex patterns or codes (see Cryp­tography for specialized study of codes). 
Meteorology (01%): The scientific study of the  atmosphere, including weather systems and patterns, and atmospheric phenomena. Use this skill to determine long-range weather patterns and forecast effects like rain, snow and fog. 
Pharmacy (01%): The study of chemical compounds and their effect on living organisms. Traditionally this has involved the formulation, creation and dispensing of medi­cations (whether a witch-doctor using combination of herbs or a modern pharmacist operating in a laboratory). The application of this skill ensures the safe and effective use of pharmaceutical drugs, including synthesizing ingredients, identification of toxins and knowledge of possible side effects. 
Physics (01%): Grants theoretical understanding of pres­sure, materials, motion, magnetism, electricity, optics, radioactivity and related phenomena, and some ability to construct experimental devices to test ideas. The degree of knowledge depends on the era of use. Practical devices, such as automobiles, are not the province of physicists, however experimental devices may be, perhaps in conjunction with Electronics or Mechanical Repair. 
Zoology (01%): The study of  biology that relates specifically to the animal kingdom, including the structure, evolution, classification, behavioral habits and distribution of animals, both living and extinct. Use this skill to identify animal spe­cies from interaction with the environment (tracks, drop­pings, marks, etc.), likely behaviors and territorial traits. 
Sleight of Hand (10%) 
Allows the visual covering-up, secreting or masking of an object or objects, perhaps with debris, cloth, or other inter­vening or illusion-promoting materials, perhaps by using a secret panel or false compartment. Larger objects of any sort should be increasingly hard to conceal. 
Sleight of hand includes pick-pocketing, palming a card and clandestine use of a cell phone. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Sleight of Hand is commonly opposed by Spot Hidden. Ad­just the difficulty level according to the size of the task. If it is a small item (which would fit in a pocket or up a sleeve) that is being palmed or concealed, no adjustment is required. If the item is larger, the level of difficulty may be increased. 
i Regular difficulty: picking the pocket of someone 
with less than 50% Spot Hidden skill. 

i Hard difficulty: picking the pocket of someone with 50% to 89% Spot Hidden skill. 
Pushing examples: taking more time to study the target and their behaviors; physically touching or bumping into the target; setting up an elaborate rig inside one’s jacket to conceal a card or loaded dice; having someone cause a distraction. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you feel a policeman’s hand on your shoulder; whilst no one can prove you pick-pocketed the priceless diamond, someone has their suspicions and you begin to notice that for the last week you have been tailed by a mysterious dark figure; you’re caught red-handed and the mobster doesn’t take kindly to thieves! You’re taken out back and shown the business end of a cou­ple of baseball bats. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she acts like a kleptomaniac. 
Spot Hidden (25%) 
This skill allows the user to spot a secret door or compart­ment, notice a hidden intruder, find an inconspicuous clue, recognize a repainted automobile, become aware of am­bushers, notice a bulging pocket, or anything similar. This is an important skill in the armory of an investigator. 
When a player is searching for a character who is hiding, the opponent’s Stealth skill is used to set the difficulty level for the roll. 
If a character has only a fleeting chance to spot some­thing, perhaps while running past it, the Keeper may raise the level of difficulty. If the character is conducting a thorough search, the Keeper might award an automatic success. The difficulty level might also be adapted to reflect the environ­ment, it being harder to spot something in a cluttered room. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
When searching for a character who is hiding, the oppo­nent’s Stealth skill is used to set the difficulty level for the roll. 
i Regular difficulty: searching a room for clues. 
i Hard difficulty: searching for something that has been purposefully well hidden. 
Pushing examples: taking more time to observe the area; pulling the place apart; dismantling the furniture and smashing the porcelain statuettes. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: inadver­tently drop something of your own while searching, which will make it clear that you have been there (the investigator will not realize this at the time); you fail to the spot the paw print in the mud and are surprised when the red-eyed beast leaps at you from the trees; whilst you managed to find a clue, you didn’t notice the cultists arriving home. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she is convinced that something is there and that they will find it under the wallpaper, hidden in the plaster or beneath the floorboards. 
Stealth (20%) 
The art of moving quietly and/or hiding, without alerting those who might hear or see. When attempting to avoid de­tection, the player should attempt a Stealth skill roll. Ability with the skill suggests either that the character is adept at moving quietly (‘light-footed’) and/or skilled in camouflage techniques. The skill might also suggest that the character can maintain a level of patience and cool-headedness to remain still and unseen for long periods. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
When attempting to hide, the opponent’s Spot Hidden or Listen skill is used to set the difficulty level for the roll. Situational modifiers may also apply (e.g. darkness or loud noises). 
i Regular difficulty: moving quietly around the house 
to avoid detection by average people (those with 
Spot Hidden and Listen skills of less than 50%). 
i Hard difficulty: sneaking past an attentive guard dog; having only seconds to find a hiding place. 
Pushing examples: taking more time to study the area; re­moving your shoes; causing a distraction; sitting tight until the coast appears clear. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: unbeknown to you, you have been spotted and rather than approach you directly, the cultists decide to summon ‘something’ to get you; you hear the cupboard door behind which you are hiding being locked then nailed shut. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll the investiga­tor may believe he or she is invisible, when in fact everyone can see them. 
Survival (Specializations) (10%) 
Knowledge of this skill provides the expertise required to survive in extreme environments, such as in desert or arctic conditions, as well as upon the sea or in wilderness terrain. Inherent is the knowledge of hunting, building shelters, hazards (such as the avoidance of poisonous plants), etc., according to the given environment. 
You may spend skill points to purchase any skill spe­cialization. The generic ‘Survival’ skill cannot be purchased. An environment specialism should be determined when this skill is chosen, for example: Survival (Desert), (Sea), (Arctic), etc. When a character does not have the obvious survival specialty, they may roll against an allied specialty with the level of difficulty increased (or penalty die) at the Keeper’s discretion. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Modifiers may be awarded for the conditions or situation, or where the character has no specialist skill for a particular environment. 
i Regular difficulty: find/make shelter; locate water 
and sources of food. 
i Hard difficulty: as above but when weather condi­tions are extreme and/or you are badly injured. 
Pushing examples: trying something risky (e.g. drinking the water without purifying it first; eating unidentified ber­ries); using all of one’s clothing to improve a shelter; burn­ing every possession to make a signal fire. 

Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the cave you found is inhabited by a very angry bear; having burnt all of your clothes to make a signal fire, you have now given away your position to your pursuers—will your rescuers reach you before the pursuers do? 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she believes themselves to be impervious to the elements and able to exist as a breatharian (able to exist without food and water). 
Swim (20%) 
The ability to float and to move through water or other liquid. Only roll Swim in times of crisis or danger, or when the Keeper judges it appropriate. Failing a pushed Swim roll can result in loss of hit points. It may also lead to the person being washed away downstream, partially or completely drowned. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Modifiers may be awarded for the conditions or situation. i Swimming a length in the swimming pool: no roll required 
i Regular difficulty: swimming in a fast-moving cur­rent. 
i Hard difficulty: swimming against a rapid current while fully dressed; adverse weather conditions. 

Pushing examples: taking a big breath and really ‘going for it’ with all your remaining strength; pushing your physical limits. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the current pulls you under and you lose consciousness, awaking on an unknown beach; you are pulled under and are injured by being dashed against rocks; you strive for the lifeboat and, just as you make it, you feel something cold and slimy grab your ankle. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she keeps on swimming and probably considers dry ground dangerous for some reason. 
Throw (20%) 
To hit a target with an object or to hit a target with the right part of the object thrown (such as the blade of a knife or hatchet), use Throw. 
A palm-sized object of reasonable balance can be hurled up to STR in yards. 
If the Throw roll fails, the object lands at some random distance from the target. The Keeper should compare the closeness of the die roll result to the highest number which would have indicated success, and choose a distance between target and thrown object that feels comparable. 
The Throw skill is used in combat when throwing knives, rocks, spears, grenades or boomerangs. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
Modifiers might be applied for the weight of the object be­ing thrown or, in the case of a very light object, the prevail­ing wind conditions. 
i Regular difficulty: throw a basketball through a 
hoop. 

i Hard difficulty: an accurate shot at a distance; throw a basketball through a hoop from center court. 
Once an item has been thrown, it is quite literally out of the investigator’s hands and therefore there is nothing the player can do to justify Pushing the roll. If multiple missiles are available, there is no risk connected with failure and it is only a matter of time until the investigator is successful, don’t roll dice. If multiple missiles are available and there is a distinct risk connected with failure then the Keeper might ask for a Pushed roll. 
Pushing examples: taking more time to assess the distance or waiting some time for more favorable conditions; putting every ounce of strength into the throw and throwing your­self as you launch the item; throwing a lot of items in quick succession hoping one will hit the target; taking a massive run-up and risking your momentum taking you over the ravine. 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: you send the object flying to your companion as you stumble and fall, hitting your head against the jagged rocks; you throw too hard and the object flies over the high church wall in to the graveyard; the dynamite stick slips from your hand—you look for it in vain but fail to see it in your hood, and only then do you smell the burning fuse. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she will refuse to let go of the item to be thrown. 
Track (10%) 
With Track, an investigator can follow a person, vehicle or animal over earth and plant/leaves. Factors such as time passed since the tracks were made, rain and the type of ground covered may affect the difficulty level. 
Opposing skill/Difficulty level: 
If tracking someone who is trying to conceal their tracks, the opponent’s Stealth skill should be used to set the diffi­culty level; modifiers might also be applied for the prevailing weather and terrain. 
i Regular difficulty: tracking an animal or human in 
the forest under normal (temperate) conditions. 

i Hard difficulty: following a trail that is several (or more) days old. 
Pushing examples: backtracking and taking more time to study the area; walking in increasing spirals to locate the tracks (taking longer, possibly making more noise and mak­ing oneself more visible). 
Sample Consequences of failing a Pushed roll: the tracks you are following lead you directly into the path of a hun­gry bear/lion/cannibal; you find yourself going round and round in circles, and night is falling as you realize you are now totally lost; you follow the tracks, only to be ambushed or caught in a trap laid by the thing you are following. 
If an insane investigator fails a pushed roll, he or she will compulsively follow any tracks (convinced they are the right ones) until they are physically restrained or convinced otherwise. 
Optional Rules 
Specializations: Transferable Skill Benefit 
Specializations are dealt with in one of two ways: G Art and Craft, and Science skills are addressed under Skill Specializations on page @@. 
G In the case of Fighting, Firearms, Languages (by group­ing) and Survival, the specializations contain much that is common and transferable from one specialization to another. For example, in learning to aim and maintain a firearm, there are more similarities than differences between the subdivisions of firearms. In the case of fighting, there are a lot of transferable skills that any fighter will use (reaction times, judging range, evasions, feints, timing, spotting openings, knowing where to hit, etc.). Contrast those comparisons with Astronomy and Pharmacy (in the case of Science) or Actor and Vacuum Tube Blower (in the case of Art and Craft). Thus within Fighting, Firearms, Languages (by grouping) and Sur­vival, the improvement of one specialization has a trans-ferable benefit to all other closely related specialisms. 



When a character first raises a specialization within one of these skills to 50% or over, all other related skill specializations are raised by 10 percentage points (but not higher than 50%). This may happen only once more: when a character first raises a specialization to 90% or over, all other related specializations are again raised by 10 percentage points (but not higher than 90%). During investigator creation the player may boost a specialization and gain the additional 10 points in each of the others prior to spending further points in those other specializations. 
Languages 
When a character first raises a language (other than Own Language) to 50%, all other related language families are raised by 10 percentage points (but not higher than 50%). This may happen only once more: when a character first raises a language (other than Own Language) to 90%, all other related languages within that family are raised by 10 percentage points (but not higher than 90%). For exam­ple, related family categories include Germanic (English German, Dutch), Slavic (Russian, Czech, Polish, etc.), Ni­ger-Congo (Swahili, Zulu, Yoruba, etc.) 
Note this is in no way an exhaustive list of the possible language families, and Keepers opting to use this rule are recommended to refer to standard encyclopedia entries for “language families”. 
"It will take me several weeks to translate this" 


I have always believed that such strange, inaccessible worlds exist at our very elbows, and now I believe I have found a way to break down the barriers. I am not joking. 
– H.P. Lovecraft, From Beyond 


his chapter details the Call of Cthulhu game rules that are used to ensure fairness and balance, as well as to resolve conflicts and challenges as they arise in play. 
When to Roll Dice 

There is a large amount of fun to be had playing a roleplay­ing game, and much of it is derived from discussing your character’s actions with your fellow players (and the Keeper) without rolling any dice whatsoever. Players declare what their investigators are doing and often speak ‘in character’ to better express themselves. The Keeper states what the non-player characters (NPCs) are doing, and describes the world around the investigators. So far so good. Everyone accepts what everyone else says and builds upon it to create an interesting story. Until, of course, they don’t accept what someone else is saying. For example, an investigator doesn’t believe what Old Man Marsh (played by the Keeper) is saying about the whereabouts of the missing library books. When someone says something that you don’t like, you can ask for clarification or you can disagree—but ultimately, if you don’t accept what someone says about what’s happening in the story, the situation can be resolved with dice. Likewise, you could simply say that your investigator managed to climb to the top of the church steeple in the pouring rain at midnight—however if there’s no dice roll to test your investigator’s skill, there’s no tension or drama either! 
Equally there’s no need to roll dice for everything. For example, each investigator has a Drive Auto skill, but dice don’t need to be rolled every time an investigator gets in a car—that would be just dull! If you say your investigator is driving to the local historical society, unless someone takes issue with you, then it’s done. Simply move on with the sto­ry. Normal day-to-day stuff that everyone ‘just does’ should be just that—no dice needed. 
However, if the Keeper describes a car full of cultists attempting to push the investigator’s car off the road, the player may object to this. The player could say, “Hold on, I’m putting my foot down and getting away,” but still the Keeper may insist the cultists are barging the investigator’s car off the road. There’s a disagreement, a conflict—a reason to roll dice and see whether the investigator’s car is indeed pushed in to the ditch. The story has reached a moment of tension that requires a definite outcome. Time to reach for the dice! 
Skill Rolls 
The word "roll" is used in conjunction with the appropriate skill or characteristic; thus the Keeper will, for example, call for a "Climb roll" or a "Strength roll". 
The Keeper has the final say about which skill or char­acteristic is appropriate to roll, depending on the situation and the nature of the opposition. The term "skill roll" is used regardless of whether a skill or a characteristic is used. 
The player should be clear about what they want to achieve by stating a goal before rolling any dice. If the goal isn’t acceptable, the Keeper should help the player to re­phrase it. The goal should define the player’s objective clear­ly and concisely. For advice on setting goals see Chapter 10: Playing the Game. 

Skill Roll: Determining the Difficulty Level 
The Keeper determines the difficulty level for skill rolls. There are three levels of difficulty in Call of Cthulhu: Regu­lar, Hard and Extreme. 
Regular difficulty level: an average example of what would challenge a competent person. The player needs to roll equal to or below their full skill or characteristic in order to suc­ceed. This should be used in the vast majority of cases. 
Hard difficulty level: this task would challenge a profession­al. The player needs to roll equal to or below a half of their skill or characteristic in order to succeed. This should only be used occasionally. 
Extreme difficulty level: this task would challenge an ex­pert; it is on the border of what is humanly possible. The player needs to roll equal to or below a fifth of their skill or characteristic in order to succeed. This should be reserved for extreme situations. 

If you, as Keeper, feel that the task is easy then don’t ask for a dice roll. Save dice rolls for challenging situations. 
If the investigator is facing a living being, the difficulty level should be set according to the complementary skill or characteristic belonging to that being (human or otherwise). It is up to the Keeper to decide on what skill or characteristic would be used by the opponent to counter the investigator’s actions—examples can be found with each skill entry (see Chapter 4: Skills). 
i If the opponent’s skill or characteristic is below 50, the difficulty level is Regular. 
i If the opponent’s skill or characteristic is equal to or above 50, the difficulty level is Hard. 
i If the opponent’s skill or characteristic is equal to or above 90, the difficulty level is Extreme. 

In the case of non-living opponents, the Keeper must act as judge, weighing up the pertinent factors. A standard chal­lenge would be of Regular difficulty. Where the challenge is clearly beyond Regular difficulty, the Keeper may use the Hard difficulty level. If the challenge is exceptionally diffi­cult but still within the bounds of what is humanly possible, the Keeper should use the Extreme difficulty level. 
Wherever possible, the situation should be framed in such a way that the dice are being rolled by the player. Players won’t get much fun out of watching the Keeper roll the dice every time. If the investigator is attempting to use their Stealth skill to furtively follow a non-player character, the player would roll the dice and the Keeper would use the non-player charac­ter’s Spot Hidden skill to set the difficulty level. If the situation were reversed and the non-player character were following the investigator, the player would roll the dice against their Spot Hidden skill to see if the tail is spotted, but this time Keeper would use the non-player character’s Stealth skill to set the difficulty level. Remember, the players should be rolling the dice more often than the Keeper. 
"Sorry, the library is closed!" 

See Chapter 10: Playing the Game for more advice on setting difficulty levels. 
Rolling the Dice: Success or Failure 
There are two possible outcomes of a roll: success or failure. The various divisions of skill (fifth, half, full) do not equate with graduations of success. The player states a goal and then rolls the dice. If the dice roll is equal to or below the required number, the goal is fully achieved. If the dice roll is below a half or a fifth of the specified skill, the goal will not necessarily be performed to a higher standard. Any further interpretation of the roll is at the discretion of the Keeper. 
Success 
If the player has rolled equal to or under the target set by the Keeper, their investigator has achieved the goal that was set and agreed before the roll. The player should be encouraged to participate in describing the outcome. This can include aspects of the story beyond his or her investigator, such as the actions of non-player characters and the environment; however, such things may be moderated by the Keeper. Thus both player and Keeper are involved in describing the out­come of a successful roll. 


Failure 
The player stated a goal and has failed to achieve it, but exactly how the player’s investigator has failed is entirely up to the Keeper (though of course the players may throw in suggestions). Initial failure at a skill roll should not usually inflict damage or Sanity loss, but this depends on the circumstances. A failed roll could represent failure to act rather than a failed attempt. Worse things may happen if the player chooses to ‘push the roll’ and fails a second time (see Pushing the roll). Save ‘what’s the worst that could happen?’ style consequences for pushed rolls. 

Harvey speeds towards the monster. 

Pushing the Roll 
...the essence of pure nightmare was upon me. Sanity depart­ed—and, ignoring everything except the animal impulse of flight, I merely struggled and plunged upward over the incline’s debris as if no gulf had existed. Then I saw the chasm’s edge, leaped frenziedly with every ounce of strength I possessed, and was instantly engulfed in a pandaemoniae vortex of loathsome sound and utter, materially tangible blackness. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Out Of Time 

Pushing a skill roll provides the player with a second and final attempt to achieve a goal. A pushed roll is only allowed if it can be justified, and it is up to the player to do this. Whenever a player asks, “Can I push the roll?” the Keeper should always ask, “What action are you taking to push the situation?” It is not for the Keeper to simply say yes or no; it is for the player to describe the extra effort or time taken to justify the pushed roll. If the player is stuck, other players or the Keeper might offer suggestions. 
By making a pushed roll, the player is upping the ante and giving the Keeper permission to bring dire consequenc­es should the roll be failed a second time. Pushing a roll means pushing the situation to the limit: 
T If you are breaking down a door, it may mean throwing yourself at it with no heed for your own safety. 
T If you are persuading a police officer, it may mean risking arrest. 


T If you are searching a room, it may mean turning it over and risking breaking things, or spending too long there when you know the bad guys might return at any moment. 
T If you are trying to read someone with Psychology, it may mean studying a person that little bit too closely, or asking some very prying questions. 
T If you are picking a lock, it may mean using a little too much force. Something may break, but what will it be? The lock or your lock picks? 
T If it involves Cthulhu Mythos, you may risk staring into the abyss of dark knowledge for so long that something looks back at you. 
T If you are climbing a wall, it may mean continuing even though it feels completely unsafe. 
T If you are reading a tome, it may mean obsessing over every page, reading and rereading obsessively until you can correlate the contents. 
It is important to note that a pushed roll is not simply a re-roll; time always passes between rolls—it may be seconds or hours. 
When making a pushed roll, the goal must still be achievable. The skill and difficulty level normally remain unchanged, but may be modified if the situation changes. 
Only skill and characteristic rolls can be pushed, not Luck, Sanity or combat rolls, or rolls to determine an amount of damage or Sanity loss. 

Foreshadowing Failure 
So haunting were these formulae, and so frequently did he 
come upon them, that before the doctor knew it he was 
repeating them under his breath. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Case Of Charles Dexter Ward 

Before rolling the dice for a pushed roll, the consequence of failure may be foreshadowed by the Keeper. To foreshadow, the Keeper says, “If you fail…” followed by as much detail as he or she desires. The Keeper should highlight things that would be apparent to the investigator (though perhaps unconsidered by the player). Things that the investigator would not be aware of might only be hinted at (at the Keeper’s discretion). Players are welcome to offer their own suggestions for consequences, especially when they come up with scarier ones! 
There are two reasons why the Keeper should foreshadow the consequence: 
i The player requests foreshadowing to clarify the dangers (as the investigator would be aware of them), so that they can gauge the risk. 
i The Keeper chooses to foreshadow to highlight the danger or to increase the drama of the situation. 

It is imperative that the Keeper focuses on an interesting consequence, rather than flat failure. 
More advice on foreshadowing is offered in Chapter 10: Playing the Game. 
"Run! Run for your life!" 





Pushed roll: success 
The player’s goal is achieved as it would have been for the original roll. None of the consequences of failure happen. 
Pushed roll: failure 
Failing a pushed roll grants the Keeper free rein over the outcome, including damage, Sanity checks, loss of equip­ment, isolation from the rest of the investigators, capture and so on. The Keeper can even incorporate the player’s goal being achieved (even though the player failed the pushed roll), but at some form of cost. 
When a player fails a pushed roll, he or she is giving the Keeper license to make the investigators’ lives more difficult. A consequence should steer the game towards the theme of horror, taking the investigators one step nearer to their doom. A player gets to push a skill roll and, if he or she fails, the Keeper gets to push the horror back in that player’s face. 
Between a rock and a hard place! 

i A setback: a loss of equipment or the death of an ally. 
i The investigator is taken captive rather than killed. 
i A deal: rather than killing the investigator, the ene­my offers a pact or deal. 
i Fainting: it is perfectly Lovecraftian for a character to faint, only to awaken later to find themselves unharmed and the situation changed. 
Failed Dice Rolls and Sudden Endings 
Where possible try to avoid an outcome that will end the game (unless you wish to, of course). Try to be creative and describe an outcome that allows for play to proceed, but not in the way the players intended. Rather than sudden death, consider other options such as: 
More Than One Player Rolling Dice for a Skill Roll? 
In some circumstances two or more characters may work togeth­er towards the same goal. The decision of how many investigators may be involved in a particular situation is up to the Keeper. 
87 

Examples include: i Researching a single book: one person at a time may read the book. 
i Picking a lock: one person may attempt to pick the lock, rolling their Locksmith skill. 
i Delivering First Aid: two people may assist each other, both rolling their First Aid skill. A success is granted if either of them succeeds. 
i Carrying a body: the Keeper should use the SIZ characteristic of the body to set the difficulty level. Up to four people, each taking one limb, could assist one another in carrying a body, in which case a roll would only be required if the body were exception­ally heavy (see Physical Human Limits for guidance on combining physical characteristics). 
i Library Use in a public library: all investigators in the library may conduct research and attempt a skill roll. Only one successful roll is required. 
i Spotting a clue: everyone who is in the right posi­tion to view whatever is in question may roll Spot Hidden. Only one successful roll is required. 
i Determining if someone is withholding information: everyone who is able to observe the subject may roll Psychology. Only one successful roll is required. 
i Sneaking past a guard: Everyone needs to roll their Stealth skill; if one person fails, the guard will be alerted to their presence. 
The examples above are intended only as guidelines. For 
tasks in which the number of participants is limited, further 
attempts may be made by other investigators, but such at­
tempts will take additional time. It may not be apparent in some situations whether an­
other skill roll should be allowed or if a player is required to 
push a skill roll; the Keeper must decide. In general, when an 
investigator is attempting the same goal a second time, this 
requires a pushed roll. 

Physical Human Limits 
The investigators are only human, and there are limits to what they can achieve physically. As has already been stated, the difficulty level of a roll is Extreme when opposed by a characteristic of 90 or above. The upper limit of what can be faced with an Extreme success is 100 + the investigator’s skill or characteristic. Anything beyond this is impossible for that character, and no dice roll is allowed. Thus no human can win a test of STR versus a large monster such as a Dark Young (STR 220). 
The only way to exceed human limits is for multiple investigators to combine their efforts. One or more inves­tigators’ characteristics are deducted from the opponent’s characteristic to reduce it to a level against which other investigators may make a skill roll. To do this, starting with the lowest, deduct each investigator’s characteristic value in 


"We'll get you out of there, Rodger" 
turn from the opposition’s characteristic. Continue doing this until the opponent’s characteristic has been reduced to a value that can be challenged by an investigator. Investigators whose characteristics were not used to reduce the opposing factor may now make a skill roll, with an Extreme, Hard or Regular difficulty level, as determined by the new value of the opposing characteristic. 
This rule is only generally applicable to physical chal­lenges in which characters can use their shared Strength or Size to achieve a task. The opposition cannot be reduced to zero or lower by this method; a skill roll is always required. 
Fumbles and Criticals 
I have said that Danforth refused to tell me what final horror 
made him scream out so insanely—a horror which, I feel 
sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his present breakdown. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, At The Mountains Of Madness 
Very high or very low dice rolls are unusual, and signify good or bad fortune for the players. 
The impact of Fumbles should take effect immediately and may not be negated through pushing the roll. 

01: A Critical Success 
A roll of 01 means that something beneficial occurs beyond simply achieving the goal. The nature of the good fortune is at the Keeper’s discretion, although the players may make suggestions. In combat, for example, a critical success means that the attacker has hit a vulnerable spot and causes maxi­mum damage. 

misfortune or bad luck is at the Keeper’s discretion. 
If the dice roll required for success is 50 or over and the dice read 100, a fumble has occurred. 
If the dice roll required for success is below 50 and the dice read 96—100, a fumble has occurred. 


Luck 
Luck rolls may be called for by the Keeper when circum­stances external to any investigator are in question, and also when determining the fickle hand of fate. If a skill or characteristic is applicable to a situation then it should be used rather than Luck. 
If the Keeper calls for a Group Luck roll, the player whose investigator has the lowest Luck score (amongst those present in the scene) should make the roll. 
If something bad is deemed to happen to one member of the group, the Keeper can simply ask who has the lowest Luck score at that moment and have that individual suffer the unfortunate event. 
You will also find an optional rule for spending Luck points to alter dice rolls at the end of this chapter. 

Intelligence Rolls and Idea Rolls 
An Intelligence (INT) roll may be called for by the Keeper when an investigator is attempting to solve an intellectual puzzle of some kind. By rolling equal to or below the inves­tigator’s Intelligence, the player will receive a solution from the Keeper. This might include solving a crossword puzzle or answering a riddle. 
An Idea roll is different to an Intelligence roll, although made in the same manner by rolling equal to or below the investigator’s Intelligence characteristic. An Idea roll is usually proposed by the players when their investigators have become stuck at a point in the investigation; perhaps they have com­pletely missed a vital clue, or just don’t know what to do next, and so the game has stalled. The outcome of the Idea roll will get the investigation back on track; however, the success or failure of the Idea roll determines whether the missed clue has been obtained easily, or at some cost to the investigators (see Chapter 10 for more advice about Idea rolls). 
Know roll 
All people know bits of information about different top­ics. The Know roll represents what’s stored in the brain’s intellectual attic, calculated as the percentage chance that the investigator’s education supplied the information. Roll equal to or under a character’s EDU value to determine the success of a Know roll. 
The investigator might know it is dangerous to pour water into sulfuric acid (without studying Chemistry), or be able to remember the geography of Tibet (without a Navigate roll), or know how many legs arachnids have (and possess only a point of Biology). 
Identification of present-day earthly languages is an excellent use for the Know roll. If a specific skill is more ap­plicable to the situation, then it should be used rather than making a Know roll (at the Keeper’s discretion). 
Opposed Skill Rolls 
(Player Versus Player and Melee Combat) 
There may be times, such as when two players are opposing one another, when you wish for both sides to roll dice to determine a victor. Opposed rolls are the standard for melee combat (see Chapter 6: Combat). Outside of combat, the Keeper should avoid using opposed rolls between non-play­er characters and investigators. However once a Keeper is accustomed to these rules, he or she may wish to use an opposed roll where they feel it will enhance the drama. 
To make an opposed roll, both sides declare a mutually exclusive goal: one will win, the other will lose. Each side selects a skill or a characteristic to use–not necessarily the same one–both of which must be approved by the Keeper. 
Both sides roll dice to determine a level of success by comparing their rolls with their chosen skill or characteris­tic. The Keeper should be aware that characteristics are usu­ally higher than skills, so where one side uses a characteristic the other side should be given the choice of whether to use a characteristic or a skill. 
Opposed skill rolls cannot be pushed. 
A skill roll can yield one of six results: 
Fumble: the roll is 100. If the roll required for success is less than 50, a roll of 96 or over is a fumble. 
Failure: the roll is above the character’s skill or characteristic (but not a fumble). 
Regular success: the roll is equal to or below the character’s skill or characteristic. 
Hard success: the roll is equal to or below a half of the char­acter’s skill or characteristic. 
Extreme success: the roll is equal to or below a fifth of the character’s skill or characteristic. 
Critical success: a roll of 01. 
Comparing results: 
A Critical success beats an Extreme success. An Extreme success beats a Hard success. A Hard success beats a Regular success. A Regular success beats a Failure or Fumble. 
In the case of a tie, the side with the higher skill (or characteristic) wins. If still tied, either an impasse has been reached or both sides should re-roll. 

Bonus Dice and Penalty Dice 
(Primaily for Use with Opposed Dice Rolls) 
Sometimes the prevailing conditions, environment and available time can hinder or benefit a skill or characteristic roll. Certain conditions mean that the Keeper may grant a ‘bonus die’ or a ‘penalty die’ to a roll. 
Bonus dice and penalty dice are not trifling small ad­ditions or subtractions of a few percentage points, and so should not be used without good cause. If a factor is so small that it would only modify a roll by a few percentage points then don’t bother with it. Driving in light rain should not inflict a penalty die, but torrential rain so thick you can barely see through it even with the wipers on full speed— now there’s your penalty! 

In most cases, the Keeper would boost or penalize a roll with a single ‘bonus die’ or ‘penalty die’, but where condi­tions are highly advantageous or dire, a second bonus die or penalty die could be applied. 
One bonus die and one penalty die cancel each other out. 
For each bonus die: 

roll an additional ‘tens’ percentage die alongside the usual pair of percentage dice when making a skill roll. You are now rolling 3 separate dice: one ‘units’ die and two ‘tens’ dice. If you have a bonus die, you should use the ‘tens’ die that yields the better (lowest) result. 



For each penalty die: roll an additional ‘tens’ percentage die alongside the usual pair of percent­age dice. You are now rolling 3 separate dice: one ‘units’ die and two ‘tens’ dice. For a penalty, use the ‘tens’ die that yields the worse (highest) result. 



"Sorry Harrison, I dont intend to die today" 


Difficulty Levels vs. Bonus/Penalty Dice 
In the majority of cases, only one person, usually the player, makes a skill roll. Any factors that provide an advantage or disadvantage for the investigator should be factored into the difficulty level set by the Keeper. Bonus dice and penalty dice may be awarded in conjunction with difficulty levels, at the Keeper’s discretion, but doing so should be the exception rather than the rule. 
In the case of an opposed roll (wherein both sides are rolling in opposition to one another, as in melee combat) difficulty levels are never set. The level of success achieved by one side is, in effect, the level of difficulty that the other side must compete against. If there are factors that provide a distinct advantage or disadvantage for one of the characters involved, the Keeper should grant a bonus die or a penalty die to that player. 
Skill rolls: Set level of difficulty. 
Opposed rolls: Award penalty dice or bonus dice. 

Combined Skill Rolls 
Some situations allow or demand the use of more than one skill. Only one dice roll is made, and the result then com­pared with each of the skills named. The Keeper will specify whether a success is required for both skills (i.e. the roll is a success when measured against each of the skills) or if only one of the skills need be successful. 
Note the importance of using a single dice roll in the latter example. Harvey has only 10% skill in both Mechan­ical Repair and Electrical Repair. The chance of success when making one dice roll and comparing it to both skills 



"I'm coming in!" 
simultaneously is 10%. If two separate rolls were made, first against Mechanical Repair and then against Electrical Repair, the chance of succeeding in both would be 1%. 
The Keeper must decide whether a situation calls for sequential skill rolls or a combined skill roll. 

Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate and Persuade Skills: Setting the Difficulty Level 
An investigator may have a Charm skill of 75%, but this does not mean that he or she can charm anyone and ev­eryone 75% of the time. The difficulty level is based on the opposing factor; in this case the matching social skill (either Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate or Persuade) or Psychology skill (whichever is higher). Thus, if the opposing skill is 50% or higher, a Hard success is required (a roll equal to or below half skill). If the opposing skill is 90% or higher, an Extreme success if required (a roll equal to or below one-fifth of skill). For the vast majority of non-player characters, these skills will be below 50%, and so the difficulty level will be Regular and the player only needs a regular success. 

i If the non-player character is positively inclined towards the player’s goal, don’t bother rolling dice, but simply have them agree. 
i If the non-player character lacks strong feelings to­wards the player’s goal then no modification to the difficulty level is required. 
i If the non-player character is strongly opposed to the player’s goal, the difficulty is raised by one or two levels. 
i If the player comes up with something to support their case, such as a substantive argument (if using Persuade), or is holding a weapon and is clearly will­ing to use it (in the case of Intimidate), the Keeper should lower the difficulty by one level. 

The lowest chance of success requires an Extreme success (equal to or below one-fifth of the skill), but in some rare circumstances the Keeper may rule that there is no chance of success and that no roll is allowed. 

"I'm beginning to lose my patience with you" 
Rewards of Experience: The Investigator Development Phase 
When an investigator successfully uses a skill in play, the player should check the box beside that skill on the investigator sheet. This gives the investigator a chance to learn from experience. No tick is earned if the roll used a bonus die. In the case of an opposed roll, both sides may achieve a level of success, but only one will win, and only the winner may tick their skill. 
Typically the investigator development phase occurs at the end of a scenario, or if playing through a campaign, at the conclusion of a chapter. This may be after one session of play or several sessions. If a story continues beyond that, the Keeper should look for a pause in the narrative to allow for an investigator development phase. 
Once an investigator development phase has been called, examine the investigator sheet to see which skills have been checked as successes. No matter how many times a skill is used successfully in play, only one check per skill can be made to see if the investigator improves. 
For each skill check the player rolls 1D100. 
Succeeding at something you are not good at is difficult, however successfully using the skill probably means that the investigator learns from the experience. Conversely, being expert at something guarantees success most of the time, yet that high skill means the investigator is unlikely to learn fur­ther. It gets progressively harder to add percentiles to a skill. 
If the player rolls higher than the current skill number, or the result is over 95, then the investigator improves in that skill: roll 1D10 and immediately add the result to the current skill points. Skills may rise above 100% by this method. 
If the player rolls equal to or less than the investigator’s skill level, then the investigator hasn’t learned from the ex­perience and the skill amount does not change. 
Repeat the procedure for all the skills that been checked, then erase all skill checks on the investigator sheet. Skills can be checked again during the next game session as they are used successfully. 
Note: The Cthulhu Mythos and Credit Rating skills nev­er receive a skill check, and no box for such a check exists on the investigator sheet. Not improving a skill has no other consequence. 


Other Activities During the Investigator Development Phase 
During the investigator development phase, the player also has the opportunity to: 
T Gain Sanity points through their investigator spend­ing time with an aspect from their own backstory (see Self-help, page @@). 
T Check their Credit Rating and review their finances (see Investigator Development Phase: Employment and Credit Rating, page @@). 
T Reduce all sanity limits by one (see Getting used to the awfulness page @@). 
Altering an Investigator’s Back­ground 
A player is free to alter or add background entries on their investigator sheet as and when they please, subject to certain limitations. The player may not erase or alter entries listed under Injuries and Scars, Phobias and Manias, Encounters with Strange Entities, or anything that has been amended or added by the Keeper without the Keeper’s permission. 
Phobias and manias may only be erased through the use of treatment (see Psychotherapy, page @@). 
The investigator’s key connection (see page @@) may be altered only during the investigator development phase, and only by the player. Guidance on using, losing and replacing a key connection can be found under Self-help (see page @@). 
Credit Rating and Investigator Expenditure 
Attempting to track personal finances in a manner similar to real life within the game would introduce unnecessary complexity. However, using a slightly abstracted method, a gauge of an investigator’s living standard and spending power becomes possible. 
An investigator’s starting Credit Rating (CR) is deter­mined during character creation, based upon the investiga­tor’s chosen profession (see Sample Occupations page @@). 

Day-to-Day Expenses and General Living Standards 
There is no requirement to make any account of accommoda­tion, food or incidental travel expenses, so long as an investi­gator’s expenditure falls within the bounds of his or her living standard (see Credit Rating, page @@). In addition, a character can spend up to his or her Spending Level on any given day. 
It is likely that money will only occasionally become an issue in play, when large amounts are being spent. This may include preparing for a major trip, purchasing expensive items such as a vehicle or rare book, or hiring extra staff. 
The combination of being allowed to spend freely with­in the bounds of their ‘living standard’ and the freedom of not being required to record expenditure below a certain ‘spending level’ is intended to minimize bookkeeping. The use of this system may to lead to areas of uncertainty as to exactly what is within the bounds of an individual’s ‘living standard’ and whether an investigator has exceeded their ‘spending level’. As always, the Keeper is the arbiter of such matters and is advised to intervene only when an investiga­tor has clearly exceeded their spending level. 

Spending Beyond One’s Spending Limit 
When an investigator spends an amount beyond their ‘spending limit’, the player must reduce their cash by the full amount spent. If cash is insufficient, the investigator may seek to use their assets. Converting assets in to cash can take time; how long is up to the Keeper. Mortgaging a property, selling antiques, gaining loans and so on all take time. If the investigator is away from their hometown, this is likely to take even longer. 
If multiple purchases of less than the investigator’s spending threshold are made on the same day, the Keeper may insist on combining the total purchases for comparison with the investigator’s spending level, and demand that a cash spend is deducted if the spending limit is exceeded. 

Harvey wants to buy a 12-gauge shotgun, costing $40. This being above his $10 spending limit, he reduces his cash by $40 (from $82 to $42). 
Later, Harvey wishes to take a trip to England, choosing to travel by sea, first class, costing $120. This is beyond Harvey’s available cash. Harvey has $1665 tied up in assets, and seeks to realize some of that capital by getting a loan from the bank. The Keeper agrees to this and decides that it might take a week to get the money. Harvey transfers $245 from his assets to his cash. From the $245, he spends $120 on the tick­et, leaving $125, which he adds to his remaining cash of $42. His cash is now $167, and his assets $1400. When he gets to England, his finances will function just as they did back home (average living standards and a $10 per day spending limit). 


Going in to debt 
How debt is taken on and repaid is all part of your story. Perhaps the investigator’s car must be sold, or money must be sought from a loan shark. Whilst financial transactions are not intended to be the focus of play, the steady decline of a character’s Sanity may well go hand-in-hand with physical and material decline. 
Investigator Development Phase: Employment and Credit Rating 
Ill-health (physical or mental) or continued absence from work may lead to loss of employment and a fall in income. Some professions do not require the investigator to be ac­tively employed to derive an income (such as Dilettante), and so are not prone to loss of employment. However a stock market crash will have a major effect on such an in­dividual’s finances, and events should be dealt with at the Keeper’s discretion (perhaps using Luck rolls). Conversely, Credit Rating might be raised when an investigator acquires a higher-paid job. 
A person can be rich one day and on the street the next, but a gradual decline is more common. If an investigator loses their employment, they lose their income, and their Credit Rating will fall. A loss of assets does not necessarily indicate a loss of Credit Rating if one still has a reliable income. 
Where an investigator’s financial situation has under­gone a significant change, the Keeper should decide on one 

Money Coming In 
During the game a character may receive a large sum of mon­ey, perhaps as a reward. Such a sum can be added to cash in the short term or be invested in time as part of their assets. 
of the following options. The following list of conditions recalculated to fit the revised Credit Rating score. Second, an ranges from good to bad, and should generally be applied investigator can spend or accrue a large sum of money that will during the investigator development phase. affect their asset value and, if sufficient, also alter their Credit Rating score. The Keeper should use the advice above to change 
I’m rich! When an investigator comes in to money, they 
should check to see if their assets are equal to those of a 

higher ‘living standard’ bracket. If this is the case, the player should increase their investigator’s Credit Rating in steps of 1D10 until their Credit Rating is within the new bracket. 
Things are looking up: if the investigator has been promot­
ed, their Credit Rating should rise accordingly (add 1D6 Credit Rating). 
Life goes on as usual: if nothing much has changed to affect the investigator’s income, their Credit Rating will not alter. 
Tightening one’s belt: the investigator is demoted or takes a period of unpaid leave. Decrease Credit Rating by 1D10. 
Sold the family silver: the investigator has spent the vast majority of their assets. If the investigator’s total worth (cash plus assets) now equals the asset value of a lower income level, decrease Credit Rating by 1D10. 
Bad luck and troubles: the investigator loses their main source of income, usually their job. Decrease Credit Rating by 2D10 with each following investigator development phase. If there is a state safety net, the minimum Credit Rating will be 1D10-1. 
Crash! Sudden loss of all sources of income and all debts called in, such as a stock market crash, leading to a dramatic fall in the value of all investments. Reduce Credit Rating by 1D100. If an investigator’s Credit Rating withstands the loss, it indicates that either investigator is offered another job im­mediately or that they secreted money away somewhere safe (note the lowest Credit Rating is zero–negative numbers are ignored). 
During the investigator development phase, following the review of Credit Rating, the investigator’s cash should be refreshed, adding the amount of cash indicated on the chart for their present Credit Rating to any remaining cash they possess. Assets can change in one of two ways. First, the investigator’s Credit Rating can rise or fall (as a result of a change in employ­ment, for example), in which case their asset value should be the Credit Rating and Asset Value of each investigator in a way that feels appropriate to events in the story. Continuing with the status quo is of course the default, and Keepers should only seek to make changes they are needed. 


Contacts 
During the game, investigators may wish to make use of their personal and professional contacts. The Keeper can either simply allow for the existence of a contact or ask for a dice roll. Players can make rolls to establish contacts for their investigators using whichever skill or characteristic seems most appropriate: Chemistry to know a chemist, Medicine to know a surgeon, and so on. 
A successful roll when establishing a contact means that either the non-player character has heard of the investiga­tor (by reputation) or that the investigator has previously met the contact. Apply modifiers to the roll as appropriate. Location is a big factor—being far from home or in a sparsely populated area would increase the difficulty level. If the investigator is on home ground and trying to contact someone of the same profession, the Keeper should lower the difficulty level. 
Establishing a contact does not automatically mean that the contact will do as the investigator wishes; some persua­sion, fast talk, charm or intimidation may be required, and should roleplayed. 
If the player wishes to push the roll to establish a contact, the Keeper should make the pushed roll out of the player’s sight (a ‘concealed dice roll’), so the player does not know the outcome. A suggested consequence for failing the pushed roll is to allow the investigator to unwittingly meet an antagonistic or unreliable contact. Such a contact may appear helpful to the investigator, but will double-cross or deceive the investigator in some manner. A concealed roll is used in this instance, since knowledge of the outcome of the dice roll would inform the player as to the contact’s disposition. 

Training 
Given enough money, someone will teach anything. The existence of training makes game sense only in campaigns, where the same investigators meet regularly to engage in an ongoing mystery. 
One should not go to school and learn more than 1D10 points in a skill per four months of game time without good reason. The Keeper decides if multiple courses can be taken and how to judge if the investigator’s class participation is satisfactory. An experience check comes automatically upon successfully completing a segment of training, however too many adventures in a semester will invalidate classroom work or practice for that term. 
At the Keeper’s option, the learning rate for a skill might be increased or the learning interval shortened if the investigator has access to a renowned teacher. Such access should come as a reward for an outstanding deed, or after great perseverance, since many compete for the favor of the famous. 
Player and Keeper may arrange self-study of any aca­demic subject. The investigator must study for four months, after which the player rolls as if for a skill check (tick) in that skill (attempting to roll above their current skill level on 1D100 and gaining 1D10 skill points if successful). 
Combat skill specialisms, such as Sword, are so little used that schools and personal trainers represent the only way to learn. 
Ageing 
There are various modifiers applied during investigator creation to reflect the investigator’s age. In the rare instances that an investigator ages significantly in play, modifiers should be applied to reflect the change in age. This is un­likely to be a factor in many games, but may come in to play in a campaign, or when jumping decades and picking up an investigator’s story later in life. Ageing may also occur suddenly as a result of a spell or magical gate; such ageing may inflict the negative physical effects without the gain in education. 
The ageing effects are cumulative, so if ageing two decades from thirties to fifties, apply modifiers for turning both forty and fifty. 
Turning 20: Make an improvement check for EDU. Add 5 points amongst STR and SIZ. 
Turning 40: Make an improvement check for EDU. Deduct 5 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. Reduce MOV by 1. 
Turning 50: Make an improvement check for EDU. Deduct 5 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. Reduce MOV by 1. 
Turning 60: Make an improvement check for EDU. Deduct 10 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. Reduce MOV by 1. 
Turning 70: Deduct 20 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. Reduce MOV by 1. 
Turning 80: Deduct 40 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. Reduce MOV by 1. 
Each decade thereafter: Deduct 80 points among STR, CON or DEX. Reduce MOV by 1. 


Optional Rules 
Spending Luck 
After the player has made a skill roll (using a skill or character­istic), Luck points may be spent to alter the result. The player can use Luck points to alter a roll on a 1 for 1 basis. The points spent are deducted from the investigator’s Luck score, which will reduce the chance of passing a future Luck roll. 
Luck points may not be spent on Luck rolls, damage rolls, Sanity rolls or rolls to determine the amount of Sanity points lost. A player may spend any amount of Luck points (up to their current Luck value) on a roll. A player may only spend Luck to alter one of their own dice rolls. 
When a skill roll is failed, the player has the option to push the roll OR spend luck; Luck points may not be spent to alter the result of a pushed roll. 
Criticals, fumbles and firearm malfunctions always apply, and cannot be bought off with Luck points. 
Also, no skill improvement check is earned if Luck points were used to alter the dice roll. 
In play, an investigator’s Luck will fall through spends and rise through recovery (see below). 
Recovering Luck points 
After each session of play, each player may make an improve­ment check for their Luck. This is rolled in the same way as for skill improvement. The player rolls 1D100 and if the roll is above their present Luck score they add 1D10 points to their Luck score. If the roll is equal to or less than the investigator’s present Luck score, no points are recovered. 
Note: An investigator’s Luck score will vary throughout play, but may not exceed 99. The Luck starting value is not used again in the game. There are no resets and the starting value can be exceeded in play. 




Then, in spite of my daze of fright and disgust, my morbid curiosity triumphed; and as the last of the monstrosities oozed up alone from that nether world of unknown nightmare, I drew my automatic pistol and shot it under cover of the thunder. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Lurking Fear 


espite their best efforts to avoid bloodshed, sometimes investigators are faced with situa­tions where the outcome can only be decided by the fist or gun. In combat investigators clash 

headlong with agents of the Cthulhu Mythos, monsters and other foul denizens of the night. 
Combat encompasses a range of skills and goals; some­times an investigator may wish to merely subdue an oppo­nent without causing undue harm, whilst at other times the goal may be to kill, or simply to flee. 
Combat has its own rules that focus on the action and help to determine who is doing what, when it is done, and the degree of success achieved. Rather than having a single roll decide the outcome of the fight, a series of rolls are made until there is a clear victor. 
Declaration of Intent: “What is your character doing?” 
The Keeper should always ask the player that question and encourage them to describe their investigator’s actions rath­er than using game terminology. “I’m rolling to hit,” is not something an investigator would ever say or do. Endeavor to paint a picture with your descriptions of combat and encourage your players to do likewise. When the player has described their investigator’s action, the Keeper should then tell the player which skill to roll dice against. 
Player: “I’m going to punch the guard, then run for the open door.” Keeper: “The guard is going to try to grab you. Roll your Brawling skill.” 
Keeper: “The monstrous humanoid is running straight at you—what are you doing?” Player: “I raise my shotgun and blast the thing.” 
Keeper: “OK, give me a skill roll for Shotgun.” Keeper: “Scott’s investigator is acting crazy—he’s heading out of the tent in to the freezing cold without his coat or mittens. He’ll freeze to death out there!” 
Player: “I’m going to grab him and wrestle him to the ground.” Keeper: “Let’s have an opposed Brawling roll.” 
Notice how the request for a dice roll develops out of what the players say. In the first example the goal is to get past the guard, and the punch is simply a method of achiev­ing the goal; damage may be inflicted as a consequence, but the Keeper uses the dice to judge whether the maneuver is accomplished. 
In the second example the player’s goal is clearly to inflict maximum damage, so the dice will be used to determine if the monster is hit, and to gauge the amount of damage inflicted. 
In the third example the player is trying to restrain a fellow investigator without inflicting harm. Again the dice will be used to gauge the success of the maneuver. 
The dice are then rolled, usually by the Keeper and the player simultaneously, and the results used to determine what maneuvers are achieved and how much damage is inflicted. 
How you describe the outcome of the dice roll is im­portant to your story, but of no importance to the game mechanics. One Fighting roll which inflicts 6 hit points of damage may represent a few good punches, a knee to the groin, a series of kicks or a head-butt—your description of the outcome should elaborate upon your stated intention, suiting the relative success achieved. 
Try to use this format each round: allow each character’s actions in the story to suggest what rolls are required, resolve the dice rolls, incorporate the outcome of the rolls back in to the story, then move on to the next character. Don’t just repeatedly roll dice without any story. 
Striking the First Blow                           (Surprise Attacks) 
Something must happen to start a combat; someone must strike the first blow. Opponents may square up to each other like two boxers in the ring, knowing they are engaged in a fight even before the first punch is thrown. If this is the case, the Keeper should start a combat round. 
Alternatively the attack may be a complete surprise; a sudden knee to the groin or punch to the jaw, for example. When someone states that they are making a sudden, unex­pected attack, they should have the opportunity to surprise their opponent. If the Keeper were to automatically switch to combat rounds (see below), the person who declared the first attack may end up acting last in the DEX order, which would make no narrative sense. 
Of course if the target has their wits about them, they may see the attack coming. The Keeper may allow a skill roll to determine if the target anticipates the attack, using either Listen or Spot Hidden to hear or see it coming, or Psychology to perceive the attacker’s intent. The Stealth skill of the attacker can be used to set the difficulty level for the investigator’s Listen, Spot Hidden or Psychology skill, or vice versa if the investigator is the one making the surprise attack (remembering that the player should be rolling the dice where possible). 
Depending on the outcome of the roll: 
T If the target anticipates the attack, they may choose 
to dodge or fight back. 
T If the target fails to anticipate the attack, the Keeper may allow the attack to be an automatic success (un­less a fumble is rolled) or award the attacker a bonus die, depending on the situation. If the attacker is making a ranged attack (for example with a gun or throwing knife), a roll should always be made to hit. 
Note: Hitting someone on the head (when attacking unseen) from the rear would automatically succeed (unless fumbled), whereas seizing a weapon from someone’s hand would only receive a bonus die. 
When attacking a target that is unable to or chooses not to dodge or fight back, the attacker should roll their attack normally, but will only fail to hit if they roll a fumble. It 



A Deep One surprises an investigator. should be remem­bered that the Keeper decides when dice rolls are called for. If a person doesn’t wake up, why would a dice roll be required to stab or shoot them in their sleep? 
Once a surprise attack has been resolved, the Keeper should then switch to combat rounds as detailed below. 
The Combat Round 
It is confusing for everyone when multiple players act and speak at once, so to maintain order, combat is structured into rounds, with each player taking one turn in each round. 
A combat round is a deliberately elastic unit of time in which everyone wishing to act and capable of doing so has a chance to complete at least one action. An investigator’s equality of opportunity is much more important than the notion that a combat round represent a precise amount of real-world time. When every investigator and other Keep­er-controlled characters have had an opportunity to act, that combat round is over and the next round can begin. 
Dexterity and the Order of Attack 
The question of who gets the first opportunity to attack can be an important issue in a fight. Determine the order of attack by ranking the combatants' DEX from highest to lowest. In the case of a draw, the side with the higher combat skill goes first. 

Actions in a Combat Round 
On their turn in the DEX order (highest to lowest) each character may use their action: T To initiate an attack using the Fighting or Firearms skill*. 
T To perform a fighting maneuver. 
T To flee from the combat. 
T To cast a spell. 
T To perform some other action requiring time and perhaps a dice roll, such as picking a lock while others fight. 

*Note that some monsters are capable of multiple attacks in one round: these all take place on the monster’s turn. 
A character may elect to delay acting until another character has acted. If this leads to more than one character wishing to act simultaneously, the one with the highest DEX takes priority. If both insist on waiting for the other, the round may end with neither of them acting and therefore losing their action, after which play will continue with the usual order of combat next round. 
Fist Fights 
The man behind me--the only one of the party older than I--croaked the hackneyed “My God!” in the most cracked voice I ever heard. Of seven cultivated men, only Sir William Brinton retained his composure, a thing the more to his credit because he led the party and must have seen the sight first. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Rats In The Walls 

To explain the combat rules, we shall start with a simple, old-fashioned, one-on-one fist fight. Later we can add rules for melee weapons, multiple opponents, firearms and other options. 
This fight might be a barroom brawl, or any situation where two people are determined to hurt one another in unarmed combat. This is not a boxing match or a martial arts class; there are no holds barred here. This is down and dirty: fists fly, feet lash out, hair is pulled, foreheads clash, nails rake, fingers twist, vulnerable parts are targeted, eyes gouged and teeth spat out. This is all encompassed in one skill: Brawling (a specialization of the Fighting skill). The alternative to attacking is to try to avoid being hit, and this is represented by the Dodge skill. 
Melee attacks are resolved using opposed skill rolls. When attacked, a character has a simple choice: either dodge or fight back. 
T If the character chooses to fight back, use the target’s Fighting skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill. 
T If the character chooses to dodge, use the target’s Dodge skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill. 
T If the target is neither fighting back nor dodging, refer to surprise attacks on page @@. 
Resolving a Fighting Attack Made Against a Target That is Fighting Back 
Both sides roll percentage dice and compare the results with their own Fighting skill. The side with the better level of success avoids being harmed, and inflicts damage on their opponent (see Determining Damage page @@). If both sides achieve the same level of success, the character initiating the attack hits the character that is fighting back, inflicting damage. 
T If the attacker achieves a higher level of success, they deal damage to their target. 
T If the defender achieves a higher level of success, he or she has successfully blocked, parried or avoided the attacker’s blows and simultaneously landed a blow of their own upon their attacker, inflicting damage. 
T In the case of a draw, the attacker wins (when their opponent is fighting back). 
T If both fail, no damage is inflicted. 
Resolving a Fighting Attack Made Against a Target That is Dodging 
The attacker and the target (who is trying to dodge) make an opposed roll using their Fighting skill and Dodge skill respectively. If the attacker gains a higher level of success, the attack is successful and the attacker inflicts damage on the loser (see Determining Damage page @@). Otherwise the attack is dodged and no damage is dealt. If both sides achieve the same level of success the character dodging wins and evades the attack. 
T If the attacker achieves a higher level of success, they deal damage. 
T If the defender achieves a higher level of success, they have dodged the attack and take no damage. 
T In the case of a draw, the defender wins (when the defender is dodging). 
T If both fail, no damage is inflicted. 
No pushing combat rolls 

There is no option topush combat rolls (eitherFighting or Firearms). Skillrolls are resolved with one or two rolls, but combat is resolved with a sequenceof rolls. Pushing a skillroll indicates a subsequentattempt—a concerted effortto succeed. In combat this subsequent attemptwould be your next punchor your next shot, i.e. your 
Determining Damage 
The amount of damage that an attack delivers is indicated on Table XVII: Weapons (pages @@-@@), 1D3 for an un­armed human attack). 
Extreme damage and impales 
Greater damage is inflicted if the attacker gains an Extreme level of success in their attack. This only occurs if the attack is made on a character’s turn in the DEX order, not when fighting back: each character gets one moment in the spot­light each round, and this is their opportunity to make an outstanding attack. 
If the attacker achieves an Extreme success with a non-impaling weapon (for example, blunt weapons, such as a fist, kick or club), then they have hit a weak spot and caused maximum damage (maximum damage plus maxi­mum damage bonus (if any). 
If the attacker achieves an Extreme level of success with a penetrating weapon (such as a blade or bullet) then an ‘impale’ has been inflicted. This means that the weapon or bullet chanced to strike a vital area, driving deeply through arteries or slashing crucial tendons or muscles. Apply the increased damage as for an Extreme success with a blunt weapon (maximum damage plus maximum damage bonus) and add a damage roll for the weapon. 


For example: a character with 1D4 damage bonus achieves an Extreme level of success when attacking with a switchblade. The player rolls 1D4 for the weapon’s damage, and adds the maximum damage the weapon can inflict 
(4) together with their maximum damage bonus (4). This results in a total of 1D4+8, (a range of 9 to 12 points of damage). 
Weapons that can impale are indicated on the Table 
XVII: Weapons (pages @@-@@). 
Using Melee Weapons In a Fight 
Anything that can be picked up and used to hit or stab can be considered a melee weapon. If it is the kind of weapon that anyone could just pick up and use (a chair leg, kitchen knife, etc.), then use the Fighting (Brawl) skill. Such weapons be-
Old Man Birch has a good left hook. 

long to the basic weapons category and include simple clubs and knives. If the weapon is more cumbersome or complex and does not conform to the basic weapons category, a weapon specialization skill should be used. Weapons with similar characteristics and function are grouped together for the purpose of weapon skill specializations. 
Consult Table XVII: Weapons (pages @@-@@) for de­tails of the weapon groups and specific weapons, together with the damage they inflict. 

Improvised Weapons 
All sorts of items can be used to inflict physical harm: snooker cues, scissors, bottles, rocks and so on. Even a gram­ophone player could be smashed over the back of someone’s head for a nasty injury. 
The Keeper should determine the damage done by an improvised weapon by using a comparable item on Table 
XVII: Weapons (pages @@-@@). If the improvised weapon is similar to a basic melee weapon, such as a knife or club, it may be used with the Fighting (Brawl) skill. If it is not, the Keeper should decide on which Fighting skill specialization is appropriate. 
Everyone is strongly encouraged to make use of the environment in a fight. Doing so will add a unique feel to each fight and will make the setting come to life. If every fight uses the same old punches, kicks and regular weapons, they may feel repetitive. Picture the scene and grab what comes to mind. If the fight takes place in a bar, you should be swinging pool cues, throwing bottles and hitting each other with barstools. Fire pokers, hat stands and ornamental swords may be to hand in a mansion. Computer monitors, power cables and scissors could all be deadly in an office. As Keeper, encourage your players to improvise and don’t block their ideas without good reason. If you want to introduce the hand of fate to determine whether that handy impro­vised weapon is present, call for a Luck roll. 
Fighting Maneuvers 
If a player describes a goal other than simply inflicting phys­ical harm, such as disarming their opponent or knocking them over, then it can be resolved with a maneuver. This may include pushing someone out of the way, throwing the opponent to the floor, restraining someone in a headlock, disarming an opponent, and so on. 

Step 1: Compare Builds 
Clearly skill is an important factor in performing a success­ful fighting maneuver, but size and strength also have an effect. A small, skillful fighter might unbalance or disarm a larger opponent, but there are limits. No human is ever going to be able to wrestle a huge monster such as a Dark Young of Shub-Niggurarth to the ground, whatever their skill. Conveniently, Size and Strength are already factored in to each character’s Build, and thus by comparing these we may gauge the relative might of the opponents. 
To determine the relative capability of the two opponents and whether the character performing the maneuver takes penalty dice, simply compare the Build of the two combat­ants. If the character performing the maneuver has a smaller Build than their opponent then he or she takes a penalty die for each point of difference (to a maximum of two penalty dice). If an opponent exceeds the attacker’s build by three or more, any fighting maneuvers are ineffective; the attacker may be able to lay hands on their opponent, but lacks the strength and size required to take advantage of their grip. 
T If the character performing the maneuver has a Build that is three or more points lower than their opponent’s, the maneuver is impossible. 
T If the character performing the maneuver has a Build that is two points lower than their opponent’s, the maneuver roll is made with two penalty dice. 
T If the character performing the maneuver has a Build that is one point lower than their opponent’s, the maneuver roll is made with one penalty die. 
T If the character performing the maneuver has the same (or higher) Build as their opponent, no addi­tional modifiers are applied. 
Step 2: Make the Attack Roll 
A maneuver is treated the same way as a regular Fighting attack. Most maneuvers will use the Brawling skill, though some may be performed using another specialization: for example, the Fighting (Sword) skill might be used to disarm a person. The Keeper must rule according to the situation. The opponent should choose to either dodge or fight back as they would when attacked normally. 
Maneuver attack roll: T If the target is dodging: the attacker’s Fighting skill is opposed by the target’s Dodge skill. If the charac­ter performing the maneuver achieves a higher level of success than the character dodging, the maneuver is successful (if tied, the target is able to dodge the maneuver). 
T If the target is fighting back: the attacker’s Fighting skill is opposed by the target’s Fighting skill. If the character fighting back achieves a higher level of success, the maneuver fails and the opponent inflicts damage on the character performing the maneuver (if tied, the maneuver is successful). 
T The target of an attack may use a maneuver of their own: 


Harvey struggles with the Thug as the Cultist flees. 


Outnumbered 
When a character is outnumbered by the oppo­sition, the character is at a disadvantage. Once a character has either fought back or dodged in the present combat round, all subsequent melee attacks on them are made with one bonus die. This does not apply to attacks made using firearms. 
Characters and monsters that have more than one attack per round may also dodge or fight back that number of times before the bonus die is ap­plied. Thus a ghoul with three attacks can fight back three times before its attackers gain a bonus die. 
Note that some Mythos entities can never be outnumbered by investigators (see Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods). 
Resolve as for fighting back, but instead of inflicting damage apply the effect of their maneuver. 
A successful maneuver allows the character to achieve one goal, such as: 
T Disarming an opponent, or wresting an item such as a book out of the opponent’s hand. 
T Place the enemy at an on-going disadvantage, either inflicting one penalty die on the opponent’s future actions or granting one bonus die to allies’ actions taken against the target (choose whichever seems most appropriate to the situation). This disadvan­tage may be as a result of physical restraint or of having been knocked to the floor. 
T To escape when physically restrained by another character. The restrained character may use a ma­neuver of their own on their turn to break out of a hold, such as a bear hug or neck lock; otherwise they are automatically held until their attacker releases them, is incapacitated or suffers a major wound (see Wounds and Healing, page @@). 
T Pushing an opponent over a cliff, out of a large win­dow or simply knocking the opponent to the floor. 
The Keeper may inflict damage on those engaged in a maneuver if it is appropriate to the events in the story— clearly someone falling from a second story window is going to take damage unless they land in a safety net or similar. 
see page @@). 
Thrown weapons may be opposed with the Dodge skill in the same way as Fighting attacks (see Resolv­ing a Fighting attack made against a target that is dodging, page @@). 
A character may not choose the option of fighting back against a ranged (missile) or thrown weapon attack unless he or she is already within close physical proximity to the attacker (within a fifth of their DEX in feet). 
Half the attacker’s damage bonus is applied to thrown weapons and missile weapons that rely directly on the user’s strength. Thus this applies to bows and slings but not to crossbows. 
To resolve a ranged or thrown attack, the Keeper should set a difficulty level as for a firearm attack (see Firearms Difficulty Levels, page @@). 
Escaping Close Combat 
A character can use their action to flee melee combat on their turn in the order of combat, providing they have an escape route and are not physically restrained. 


Combat Flow Chart 










Armor examples: 
Heavy leather jacket  1 point  
WWI helmet  2 points  
1" Hardwood  3 points  
Present U.S. Helmet  5 points  
Heavy Kevlar Vest  8 points  
Military Body Armor  12 points  
1.5" bulletproof glass  15 points  
1" Steel plate  19 points  
Large sand bag  20 points  




Armor 
Armor reduces the damage received, whether it is the natural armor of some monsters, body armor worn by a character or the natural defense of an obstacle between the attacker and the target. Deduct the number of armor points from damage inflicted by attacks passing through the armor. 
Note that armor will not reduce damage from magical attacks, poison, drowning, etc. 


Firearms 
It is true that I have sent six bullets through the head of my best friend, and yet I hope to show by this statement that I am not his murderer. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Thing on the Doorstep 
To resolve a firearms attack, make a 1D100 roll and compare the result with the attacker’s Firearms skill (using the appro­priate specialization). 
The firearms roll is not opposed. The difficulty level is determined by the range, with various other factors granting either penalty or bonus dice. A failure never deals damage. 
Firearms and the DEX Order 
It takes less time to pull a trigger than to swing a club or sword, therefore readied firearms may shoot at DEX + 50 in the DEX order. 
Range and Firearms Difficulty Levels 
The difficulty level of a firearms skill roll is always set ac­cording to range. Each doubling of range above the weap­on’s listed base range on the Weapons Chart increases the difficulty level by one step. 
T Within the base range: Regular difficulty level. 
T Long range (up to twice the base range): Hard difficulty level. 
T Very long range (up to four times the base range): 
Extreme difficulty level. Any further modifiers use bonus or penalty dice. 
At very long range, when only an Extreme success will hit the target, an impale only occurs with a critical hit (a roll of 01). 
Firearm Attack Modifiers 
Once the difficulty level of a firearms attack has been set, all other factors that lend a distinct advantage or disadvantage are taken in to account. Some options are listed below, but others may occur to you during play, depending on what happens in your stories. Modifiers grant either a bonus die or a penalty die. 
Diving for Cover (penalty die) 
A target that is aware of being fired upon may react by ‘div­ing for cover’. This may mean jumping behind a physical barrier, throwing oneself to the floor or ducking and diving at speed in an attempt to present a more difficult target. 

Diving for cover requires a Dodge roll. If this is suc­cessful, the target presents a more difficult target and the attacker gets one penalty die. 
Diving for cover is a desperate response to a desperate situation. A character that opts to dive for cover forfeits their next attack (regardless of whether they were successful or not). If they have already used their attack this round, they forfeit their attack in the following round. The only option available to a character that has dived for cover, until their next attack, is to dodge further attacks. If an individual with multiple attacks dives for cover, they forfeit all of their attacks, not just a single attack. 
Cover and Concealment (Penalty Die) 
The degree of protection offered by cover is at the Keeper’s discretion; a wooden fence may not stop a bullet, but it does obscure the target, making the shot more difficult. Conceal­ment of at least half of the target adds one penalty die to a firearms attack. 
A target that breaks cover even briefly (to fire shots for example) may be targeted by another character—if that character is holding his or her turn. 
Point-Blank Range (Bonus Die) 
If the target is at point-blank range—within a fifth of the shooter’s DEX in feet—the attacker gains a bonus die. 
An attacker that is using a firearm at point-blank range may be targeted by melee attacks and could be disarmed with a successful fighting maneuver on their opponent’s turn. A target may not fight back against or dodge a Firearm attack as they can a Fighting attack. 
Harvey shoots at the Deep One. 

Aiming (bonus die) 
The intention to take careful aim must be declared on the character’s turn in the order of combat. The shot is taken on the same turn in the order of combat on the following round. If no other actions are taken before the shot is fired, the attacker’s gains one bonus die. If the aiming character takes damage or moves while aiming, the advantage of aiming is lost. Only one bonus die may be gained by aiming. 
Fast-Moving Targets (penalty die) 
A target that is moving at full speed (MOV 8 or more) is hard to hit; apply one penalty die. 
Target Size (bonus or penalty die)
 Smaller targets are harder to hit. If the target is Build -2 or smaller, apply one penalty die. Larger targets are easier to hit. If the target is Build 4 or larger, apply one bonus die. 
Reloading Firearms (possible penalty die) 
It takes one combat round to load two shells into any hand­gun, rifle or shotgun. Allow one round to exchange a clip. Allow two rounds to change a machine gun belt. 
In a round, it is possible to put one round in a chamber and get that shot off with one penalty die. 
Handguns, multiple shots (penalty die) 
Many handguns are capable of firing 2 or 3 shots per round. Firing one shot allows for a more careful aim and steadying of the weapon. Firing more than one shot places speed above accuracy. When firing two or three shots in one round, roll for each shot individually; with all shots receiving one penalty die. 


Sometimes taking cover is more advantageous than fighting back. 



Firing into melee combat 
Combatants in melee combat are constantly on the move and may obscure one another. One penalty die is applied when targeting a combatant involved in melee combat. A fumble indicates an ally has been hit. If multiple allies are in the line of fire, the one with the lowest Luck score is hit. 
Automatic fire 
If using automatic fire an attacker can make one pull of the trigger in one combat round. The automatic weapon will then continue firing until the trigger is released or the ammunition is expended (called full auto). Some weapons are limited to fire a burst (i.e. 2 or 3 bullets) rather than full auto, whilst others may be switched to fire semi-automatic (single bullets), and/or burst or full auto. 
For full auto: the player declares the number of rounds (bullets) to be fired, which may be any number up to the capacity of the gun before rolling the dice. Due to the recoil 
Tommy guns aren't always useful against the Mythos.. 
of automatic weapons, it is very hard to place a high number of rounds in a single target. To simulate this, the number of bullets fired is divided into a series of volleys, with an attack roll made for each volley. 
A volley is a number of bullets up to or equal to the firer’s submachine gun (SMG) or machine gun (MG) divid­ed by 10 and rounded down: simply read the tens digit of the skill value. Regardless of skill, a full auto volley is never 



less than 3 bullets. For example: a character with Firearms (SMG) 47% would fire four bullets in a volley. A character can fire full auto (multiple volleys) in a single round until their ammunition runs out, although the chances of hitting reduce after the first volley has been fired. 
For burst fire: one pull of the trigger fires 2 or 3 bullets, this being considered the best combination of accuracy and conservation of ammunition. This is simply treated as a volley of 2 or 3 shots (depending on the firearm; the user’s skill plays no role in determining the number of bullets). 
When firing semi-automatic (ie. multiple single shots): 
apply a penalty die to each shot, making a skill roll for each bullet fired, just as when firing multiple rounds from a handgun see Handguns, multiple shots (page @@). 
Rolling to hit with automatic fire: 
First attack roll: apply the usual rules for a firearms attack roll (set difficulty by range and then apply any modifiers). 
Second and further attack rolls: add one penalty die (or remove a bonus die) for each additional attack roll. If this would incur three penalty dice, stick with two penalty dice and raise the difficulty level by one step (from Normal to Hard, Hard to Extreme, Extreme to Critical, or Critical to impossible). 

A Summary of

The attacker must make a fresh attack roll for each volley (or burst) of shots or whenev­er they select a new target. Firearms Modifiers: Bonus 
All targets should be within a reasonable arc of 
and Penalty dice

fire (around a sixty-degree arc). Ammunition is expended when moving between targets (one bullet per meter/yard). This is simply Difficulty Level Bonus Die Penalty Die 
additional wasted ammunition, and for con-Regular: Normal Aiming for 1 round Target diving for venience is not factored into volley size, attack range cover rolls or the quantity of shots that can be made 
Hard: Long range Point blank Fast-moving target before incurring penalty dice 
(MOV 8+) Resolving each attack roll: 
Extreme: Very long Large target (Build Partial (50%+) con-T If the attack roll is successful: half of the 
range 4+) cealment shots fired hit the target—roll damage for half of the shots (round down, Small target (Build minimum of one). Subtract any armor -2)from each shot. 
T If the attack is an Extreme success: all Multiple handgun shots fired hit the target, the first half shots (round down, minimum of one) of 
Loading and firing which impale. Subtract any armor from one shot in a single each shot. As for all firearm attacks, round 
if the difficulty level of the shot was Firing into melee 
Extreme, the best possible result is a successful hit and not an impale. 
NOTE: When resolving the attack roll, the level of success does not directly dictate the amount of damage inflicted. The level of success rolled must be compared with the difficulty level of the shot (as determined by the range). Thus if the shot was made at long range and a Hard success was required to hit the target, rolling a Hard success would mean that it is simply successful. 
Malfunctions 
Firearms are prone to jamming or misfiring. With any at­tack roll result equal to or higher than the firing weapon’s malfunction number (see Table XVII: Weapons (pages @@­@@), the shooter does not merely miss—his or her weapon does not fire. If the weapon is a revolver, break-open gun or bolt-action rifle, the problem is merely a dud round. If the weapon is lever-action, the malfunction is a jam. Fixing a jam takes 1D6 combat rounds, plus a successful Mechanical Repair roll or Firearms skill roll. The user can keep trying once per round until succeeding. If the roll is also a fumble, the Keeper may choose whether the gun malfunctions or if some other outcome occurs, such as hitting an ally or the wielder injuring themselves in some way. 



Wounds and Healing 
I think they mean to get rid of me because of what I have discovered. There is a great black stone with unknown hieroglyphics half worn away which I found in the woods on Round Hill, east of here; and after I took it home everything became different. If they think I suspect too much they will either kill me or take me off the earth to where they come from. They like to take away men of learning once in a while, to keep informed on the state of things in the human world. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Whisperer In Darkness 

Descriptions of injuries should be appropriate to the type and degree of damage received. Thus the investigator is not merely shot, but shot in one arm or the other; likewise a fall might mean the investigator has sprained an ankle, or now has a lump the back of her skull, as well as the hit point loss. 
Keepers should describe the effects of damage and try to avoid simply saying, “You lost 3 hit points.” 
Tracking Damage 
The number of hit points of damage inflicted by an attack can be used to differentiate between regular damage and major wounds. Someone beaten unconscious by punches (each doing a small amount of damage) may awaken the next day battered and bruised but able to act. However, someone who takes the same total amount of harm in a single attack, such as a gunshot, might be out of action for a week or more before the slow healing process even begins. A punch is likely to result in regular damage, whereas a gunshot is more likely to inflict a major wound. 
If the damage from a single attack is: 
T Less than half the character’s maximum hit points, 
it is regular damage. 

T Equal to or more than half the character’s maximum hit points, it is a Major Wound. 
T More than the character’s maximum hit points, the result is death. 
Regular damage: the effects 
Regular damage is the result of any single attack that deals damage equal to less than half the character’s maximum hit points in a single blow. It has no significant effect on the character until current hit points are reduced to zero, when the character will become unconscious. A character cannot die as a result of regular damage. 
Major Wound: the effects 
A Major Wound results when an attack delivers an amount of damage equal to or greater than half of the character’s maximum hit points in a single attack. A character that has 
"Argh...I can't reach it" 

received a major wound may die if their current hit points are reduced to zero. When a character takes a major wound: T Tick the Major Wound box. 
T The character immediately falls prone. 
T Make a successful CON roll to avoid the character falling unconscious. 
T If current hit points fall to zero while the Major Wound box is ticked, the character is dying (see Dying page @@). 


Zero hit points can indicate one of three conditions (akin to the triage model): T If only regular damage has been taken, the character does not die and will heal in time. 
T If the character has taken a Major Wound, the character will soon die unless First Aid is adminis­tered (see Dying). If an uninjured character takes a wound that is equal to their maximum hit points, this would be a major wound. 
T If an amount of damage greater than the character’s maximum hit points is taken in one attack then death is inevitable. 
First Aid 
To be effective, First Aid must be delivered within one hour, in which case it grants 1 hit point recovery. It may be attempted once, with subsequent attempts constituting a Pushed roll. Two people can work together to administer First Aid, with a success granted if either one of them rolls a success. An exception is allowed when treating a dying character (see Dying, page @@), wherein the best that can be achieved with First Aid is to temporarily stabilize the dying character. 
Medicine 
Treatment of injuries using the Medicine skill takes a minimum of one hour and can be delivered any time after damage is taken. If this is not performed on the same day, the difficulty level is increased (requiring a Hard success). 

A person treated successfully with Medicine recovers 1D3 hit points (in addition to any First Aid they have received), except in the case of a dying character (see Dying, page @@), who must initially receive successful First Aid, after which they must be stabilized using Medicine. See Major Wound Recovery, following). 
Dying 
A character is dying when their hit points are reduced to zero and they have also sustained a Major Wound. Record the Current Hit Points as ‘D’ for dying rather than a number. 
The character immediately falls unconscious. The player must make a CON roll at the end of the next round and every round thereafter; if one of these CON rolls fails, the character dies immediately. Only the First Aid skill can be used to stabilize a dying character. Medicine cannot be used to stabilize a dying character (see Chapter 4: Skills). 
The use of First Aid to stabilize a dying character is only temporary and it must be followed up with a successful Medicine skill roll. A dying character that has been stabi­lized with First Aid should make a CON roll at the end of each hour; a failure indicates the patient’s condition has de­teriorated: they will revert to the start of the Dying process, in need of First Aid and needing to make a CON roll at the end of each round. 
The Medicine skill should be used to treat a dying character after he or she has been stabilized with First Aid. After a successful Medicine roll, change the marker from ‘D’ (dying) to ‘0’ (zero hit points). The character will then require at least one week’s complete rest. A recovery roll (see Major Wound Recovery) should be made at the end of each further week of bed-rest. 

Combat Damage Flow Chart 


Regular Damage Recovery 
Recovering from regular damage is relatively fast. If the char­acter has not sustained a major wound (the major wound box is unchecked) the character recovers 1 hit point per day. 

Major Wound Recovery 
A CON roll should be made at the end of each week of game time that the Major Wound box is ticked, T If the CON roll is failed, no recovery takes place that week. On a success, 1D3 hit points are recovered. 
T On an Extreme success, 2D3 hit points are recov­ered. 
T Add a bonus die: If the character has complete rest in a comfortable environment. 
T Add a bonus die: If the character receives effective medical care. The carer with the highest Medicine skill should make one Medicine skill roll at the end of week (before the patient’s CON roll is made). 
T Add a penalty die: If the character is in poor envi­ronment and is unable to take sufficient rest, and/ or a fumble was rolled on their doctor’s (or nurse’s) Medicine skill roll. 
A major wound is healed (erase the major wound marker) when the character either rolls an Extreme success for their recovery (CON roll), or when their current hit points have recovered to half or more than half of their full hit point total. 
If the roll is a fumble, a lasting injury, complication or worse condition results. Rather than rolling for a random complication, the Keeper is encouraged to pick something that relates to the nature of the character’s injuries (e.g. permanent limp, blindness in one eye, missing fingers, loss of a limb, scarred face, etc.) and make an entry in the inves­tigator’s backstory (under ‘Wounds and Scars’). 



Unconsciousness and Death 
Call of Cthulhu is a horror game and sometimes it may be more terrifying for an investigator to stay conscious; if the Keeper wishes, a character may be incapacitated rather than fully unconscious. Equally, final death does not have to occur instantaneously, and the light in a character’s eyes might not go out until after a particularly dramatic moment or once their final words have been uttered (at the Keeper’s discretion). 
Other Forms of Damage 
Often the Keeper will be forced to make a judgment for the amount of damage caused by some random event such as dropping a TV set on someone’s foot, running in to a door­post, or falling down an elevator shaft. Whatever the cause, consider the likely injury and rate it against the left-hand column on Table III: Other Forms of Damage.
  Don’t feel compelled to limit yourself to the amounts of damage listed—you wish you may increase or decrease the amounts subject to the circumstances of the situation. 

Table III: Other Forms of Damage 
Injury Damage Examples 
Minor: a person could survive Punch, kick, head-butt, mild acid, breathing smoky atmosphere*, a numerous occurrences of this level 1D3 thrown fist-size rock, falling (per 10 feet) on to soft swamp. 

of damage. 

Moderate: might cause a major Falling (per 10 feet) on to grass, club, strong acid, breathing water*, wound; it would take a few such 1D6 exposure to vacuum*, small caliber bullet, arrow, fire (burning attacks to kill. torch). 
Severe: likely to cause a major .38 caliber bullet, falling (per 10 feet) on to concrete, axe, fire wound. One or two occurrences (flamethrower, running through a burning room), being 6 to 9 
1D10

would render a person uncon-yards from an exploding hand grenade or stick of dynamite, a mild scious or dead. poison**. 
Deadly: the average person has a Hit by a car at 30mph, being 3 to 6 yards from an exploding hand 
2D10

50% chance of dying. grenade or stick of dynamite, a strong poison**. 
Hit by a speeding car, being within 3 yards of an exploding hand Terminal: outright death is likely. 4D10 grenade or stick of dynamite, a lethal poison**. 
Splat: outright death almost Being involved in a high-speed head-on collision, being hit by a 
8D10

certain. train. 
*Asphyxiation and drowning: a CON roll should be made each round; once a CON roll is failed, damage is sustained each round thereafter until death or until the victim is able to breathe. If the character is in a state of physical exertion, a Hard success is required on the CON roll. **Poisons: a roll equal to or less than one-fifth of CON will halve damage from poisons. Poisons may cause a variety of additional symptoms including: stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, sweats, cramps, jaundice, altered heart rate, impaired vision, convulsions, unconsciousness and paralysis. It is up to the Keeper whether the symptoms permit the victim to act or not, or to act with a penalty die or an increased level of difficulty. 
In certain circumstances, Keepers may allow a poison's effects to be shaken off if the CON roll is a critical success. 

Each injury type is for one incident or one round; one round of being punched by one attacker, one bullet, one round of drowning, one round of being burned. The char­acter will take further damage on each successive round that they are exposed to the source of the harm. 

Spot Rules: Optional Rules for Combat 
The main combat chapter contains all the rules you will need to run fight scenes in your game and you are advised to stick with these until you become accustomed to them. 
What follows are a collection of optional rules from which you can mix and match as you please. You are not compelled to use them just because they are here. Some people prefer to make spontaneous judgments about each new situation based on its unique merits, while others prefer to have a strongly defined set of rules to play by. You and your group should decide which you prefer. 
Rolling for Initiative 
If you prefer more variation in combat, ask everyone to make a DEX roll to determine the initiative order. Those who rolled an Extreme success will be first to act, followed by those who rolled a Hard success, then those with a Regu­lar success, and finally those who failed the roll. 
If more than one character achieves the same level of success, give priority to those with the higher DEX value. If characters are still tied, use combat skill value to prioritize. 
Those that roll 01 (critical) on their DEX roll should gain a tactical advantage or bonus die on their first attack. Those that roll a fumble should forgo their first attack, per­haps dropping their weapon or tripping. 
Once the initiative order has been determined, stick with it for the duration of that combat. 
Note down each combatant in order, along with their level of success (for example ‘Brian, Fail’). That way if ad­ditional combatants join, they can make a DEX roll and be placed in the existing initiative order. This will also be useful if characters draw guns, as this will affect the timing of their action in the combat round. 
When using this optional rule, a character with a readied firearm may roll their DEX with a bonus die. If a character draws a firearm during the combat and has it readied at the start of a round, they may re-roll their DEX roll with a bonus die. If this results in a worse result than previously rolled, they may retain their previous place in the order. 


Knock-Out Blows 
The standard rules already allow for a target to be knocked unconscious: when an attack inflicts a Major Wound (an amount of damage equal to or greater than half the target’s hit points), the target must make a CON roll to remain con­scious. Also a target that is reduced to zero hit points will fall unconscious automatically. 
The standard rules require significant lasting damage, and we are accustomed to seeing characters routinely knocked out on TV and in films. Rather than suffering a concussion or fractured skull, these fictional characters awake later, rub their head and carry on as if nothing happened. 
If you wish to incorporate a movie-style knock-out rule in to your game then treat this as a maneuver using blunt attacks (punch, club, rifle-butt, etc.) If the maneuver is successful, the opponent is rendered unconsciousness and suffers only 1 hit point of damage. Knock-out attacks may be used on any opponent with a skull or similar vulnerable spot (humans, deep ones, ghouls and so on, but not a shoggoth). 

Spending Luck to remain conscious 
If you are using the optional rule for spending Luck points to alter rolls, Luck may be spent to remain conscious for a few extra rounds. Remaining conscious until the end of the current round costs 1 point of Luck. The cost doubles on successive rounds—2, 4, 8, and so on—and should be spent at the start of each round. This is a mixed blessing, as an active character may present a more attractive target for further damage. 

Avoiding Nothing Happening When Both Sides Fail Their Fighting Skill Roll. 
Sometimes during melee combat, both sides simultaneously fail their Fighting skill rolls and nothing happens. One way to view this is that both sides are being equally ineffective at inflicting harm. An alternative point of view it is that dealing harm is relatively easy, and that the real skill lies in protect­ing oneself from harm during a fight. When taking the latter approach, failing a Fighting skill roll means that you have failed to protect yourself during the combat. Narratively you may have missed your target and punched a wall or moved the wrong way and in to your opponent’s blow. There are many ways to get hurt during combat; your opponent’s fist is only one of them. 
There are three solutions available to you: T First use the default rule by which nothing happens when both sides fail. 
T Second resolve the situation by breaking the tie in favor of the higher skill. 
T Third allow both sides to inflict damage as for a successful attack. The two sides have clashed during combat. 
This rule is not applicable to ranged or firearm attacks. 

Concealed Damage 
When you take an injury, do you know how close you are to death? This sense of uncertainty can be simulated if the Keeper notes down the points of damage an investigator receives without revealing a number to the player. Instead the Keeper only describes the injury to the player. Of course this is subjective and can be misleading; sometimes a minor injury can seem far worse than it is and vice versa. A cut to the head can look terrible; a little blood goes a long way, but it may only represent one or two points of damage. The Keeper can always call for a CON roll just to keep the player guessing whether they have received a major wound or not (of course the investigator would only fall unconscious if the wound really was a major wound). The Keeper can re­veal the actual number of points of damage after the event. 

Suppressing fire 
The aim of suppressing fire is to make a group of targets "dive for cover", since targets that do so cannot return fire. The shooter does not nominate a specific target but declares that they are bringing suppressive fire upon a group. A group of targets might be all the people in one room (such as in a bank heist) or any group of people within the gun’s firing arc. Each target in that area then has the option to "dive for cover" without knowing if they will be specifically targeted or not. The intention is to simulate the panic that people might feel when fired upon. 

Once those that wish to dive for cover have done so, the Keeper should determine the target or targets from the orig­inal group at random, including those that chose to dive for cover. Those that successfully dived for cover will of course be harder to hit. 
Armor Revisited 
Shotguns fire a mass of small pellets, each of which must pierce any armor. The damage for shotguns is rolled using a number of six-sided dice. Armor ratings are factored against every D6 when rolling shotgun damage. Thus, if an attack with a shotgun hits a target wearing a leather jacket (1 point of armor), that one point of armor deducted from each and every damage die, reducing a attack that deals 4D6 damage by 4 points. 
Some forms of armor offer protection to specific parts of the body; for example, a helmet protects the head. The standard Call of Cthulhu combat rules do not use hit lo­cations (see the Optional Hit Location rules page @@). In the general rough-and-tumble of a fist-fight or a fall from a window, it is credible that armoring specific parts of the body (such as the head) will reduce the overall damage received, and in the interest of simplicity and the flow of the game no further rolls need be made. 
However the case of a single specific attack (such as being shot) raises the question of whether the shot was to an area protected by armor. In the case of such an attack, a Luck roll is required. If the Luck roll is successful, the armor was hit and the damage is reduced by the armor value. If the Luck roll is failed, the attack hit an area not protected by armor. A character wearing armor that protects both head and torso gains a bonus die on their Luck roll for armor protection. 
A character wearing armor all over their body or pos­sessing natural armor such as that of an elephant’s skin does not require a Luck roll; it applies in all cases. If a weakness is spotted in an enemy’s armor—a vulnerable spot, such as an open mouth or eye—that area may be targeted, and the Keeper should set an increased level of difficulty or penalty dice for the attempt. 
Optional Hit Locations 
Rather than using Luck to determine if an armored part of the body has been hit, roll 1D20 and consult Table IV: Optional Hit Locations. 
Sights 
Telescopic sights effectively double the base range when using firearms. If using sights with a .303 Lee Enfield rifle (base range of 110 yards), for example, the difficulty level would not be increased until the range exceeded 220 yards with Extreme range being from 440 to 880 yards. Sights are of no benefit at point-blank range. 


Table IV: Optional Hit Locations 


Bracing 
Bracing a firearm, such as using a bipod, tripod or a mount­ed weapon, effectively doubles the base range for the weap­on. Where the weapon is mechanically braced to structure (vehicle or building) the user gains a bonus die. 
Movement During Combat 
Combat is usually described narratively, so the distance between combatants is rarely measured precisely. It is more often expressed in approximate and subjective terms such as "arm’s reach", "close", "across the room", "away down the alley", etc. If it seems that distance should be an issue in a particular fight, the following rules should be used. 
The maximum distance a character can move in one combat round is equal to their MOV rating multiplied by 5, in yards. 
In the case of melee attacks, the attacker must get in to melee range before attacking. T A character can move a number of yards equal to their MOV rate and attack normally. 
T If the attacker moves up to their MOV rate multi­plied by 5, they may make one melee attack at the end of the round. 

In the case of firearms, shots can be taken by a moving character at any time in the round. 
T To take advantage of the +50 DEX for using a read­ied firearm, the firearm must be used before any movement is made. 

T A character can move up to a number of yards equal to their MOV rate and make their firearms attack (or attacks) normally on their usual DEX rank. 
T If the attacker moves their MOV rate multiplied by 5 in yards, they must fire while running and so lack sufficient time to take a steady firing position, taking a penalty die to their attack roll(s). The shots will normally be taken on their usual turn in the DEX order, but may be delayed if significant dis­tance must be covered to reach a firing position (at the Keeper’s discretion). 
Complete Concealment 
If a target remains completely concealed for the whole round, the attacker may still take shots through the cover in the hope of hitting their target. The chance of hitting depends on the size of the area in which the target is taking cover; there is a great difference between hiding in a small garden shed and hiding in an aircraft hangar. The attacker is mostly using intuition to hit the target. If the hiding space is small, the Keeper should raise the difficulty level by only one step; if there is more space to hide in, raise it again or only allow a hit on a critical success, if at all. 
Shooting At a Target Through Cover 
In some instances of partial concealment, the attacker may choose to shoot through the cover in an attempt to hit the target. In this case add one penalty die (as for partial con­cealment) and apply an armor rating for the type of cover, for example a low brick wall could provide an armor rating of 10, whereas a thin wooden fence might only give 1 point of protection (see Armor page @@). 

Point-blank revisited 
The point-blank bonus die does not apply to long or cum­bersome weapons such as rifles, full-length shotguns and bows, as these are less easily bought to bear on a moving target at close range. Short-barreled shotguns (of the kind designed for home defense) or sawn-off shotguns do gain the point-blank bonus die. 
Prone 
A prone character is assumed to be lying flat on the ground. T Kicking someone when they are down is easier; fighting attacks made against a prone character gain one bonus die. 
T A character that is prone may stand up when they successfully dodge or fight back against an oppo­nent. Alternatively, when it comes to their turn in the round, they may stand up and then take their action. 
T Lying down provides a stable position from which to shoot; a prone character gets one bonus die when making a Firearms roll. 
T By lying flat on the floor you present a smaller target; those targeting a prone character with a firearm get one penalty die (ignore this if at point blank-range). 
Poisons 
Table @@: Other forms of damage covers mild, strong and lethal poisons in a simplified manner, and is likely to be all you need in the game. If you wish to focus on a specific type of poison and its effects, you may find this more detailed guide useful. 
All poisons are divided into four bands: very mild, mild, strong and lethal. The bands indicate the deadliness of the poison, and assume a single dose (application, draft, bite or sting—depending on how the poison is administered). If multiple doses are received, the victim adds a penalty die to their CON roll. 
The speed at which the poison acts is determined by the administration method and Keeper discretion. Fast-acting poisons begin to work within a single round (death from cyanide poisoning could be expected within a minute, for example). Slower poisons may take hours or even days to register their effects. 
Individual poisons cause a range of different symptoms, including stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, sweats, cramps, jaundice, altered heart rate, impaired vision, convul­sions, unconsciousness and paralysis. It is up to the Keeper whether the symptoms permit the victim to act or not, or to act with a penalty die or an increased level of difficulty. 
Alongside the various symptoms, poisons also cause physical damage. T Very Mild poisons: no damage, only temporary unconsciousness. 
T Mild poisons: 1D10. 
T Strong poisons: 2D10. 
T Lethal poisons: 4D10. 
Those who succeed in rolling equal to or below a fifth of their CON suffer a lesser effect. Damage should be halved and symptoms reduced as decided by the Keeper. In certain circumstances, Keepers may allow a poison's effects to be shaken off if the CON roll is a critical success. A character might push the CON roll by attempting to purge the poison, through vomiting, amputation or bloodletting, for example. Whether these things would work in real-life is question­able—what matters is the drama. 

Sample Poisons 
Poison 
Amanita (agaric mushrooms) 
Arsenic 
Belladonna (deadly nightshade) Black Widow Spider Venom 
(latrotoxin) Chloroform 
Cobra Venom 
Curare 
Cyanide 
Rattlesnake Venom 
Rohypnol 
Strychnine 
Speed 
6 to 24 hours 
30 minutes to 24 hours 
2 hours to 2 days 
2 to 8 hours 
1 round 
15 to 60 minutes 
1 round 
1 to 15 min­utes 
6 to 24 hours 
15 to 30 minutes 
10 to 20 minutes 
Effect (1 dose) 

Violent stomach pains, vomiting, jaundice. 1D10 damage 
Burning pain, vomiting, violent diarrhea. 4D10 damage 
Rapid heartbeat, impaired vision, convulsions. 4D10 damage 
Chills, sweats, nausea. 1D10 damage 

Unconsciousness for 1 hour. 
No damage Convulsions, respiratory failure. 4D10 damage 
Muscular paralysis, respiratory failure. 4D10 damage. 
Dizziness, convulsions, fainting, death. 4D10 damage 
Vomiting, violent spasms, yellowish vision. 2D10 damage 
Unconsciousness for 4-8 hours, possible amnesia. No damage. 
Violent muscle contractions, asphyxiation, death. 4D10 damage 
Notes 
Responsible for 95% of fatalities from mush­room poisoning; the death cap mushroom being foremost. 
Arsenic poisoning was difficult to determine (hence its popularity as a tool for murder) until 1836, when the Marsh Test was invented. 
One of the most toxic plants in the world; consumption of 10-20 berries by an adult will probably cause death. 
Rarely causes death if medical treatment is pro­vided. 
Widely used an anesthetic in 1800-1900s, how­
ever a high strength toxic dose may cause death. Contact with eyes will cause immediate irri­tation and, if untreated, blindness. If serum is available then major injury and death can be avoided. 
Common name for poison administered to arrows in South America. Harmless if ingest­ed—only direct application via a skin wound results in paralysis. 
Highly toxic—causes death if ingested as cya­nide salt or inhaled through gas. 
Venom destroys tissue, causing necrosis, al­though rarely fatal (especially if antidote is given within 1 to 2 hours). 
Odorless, colorless and only available in modern game settings. 
Death within hours if medical treatment not provided. 


The readiness with which I fell into a plan of action proves that I must have been subconsciously fearing some menace and considering possible avenues of escape for hours. From the first I felt that the unseen fumbler meant a danger not to be met or dealt with, but only to be fled from as precipitately as possible. The one thing to do was to get out of that hotel alive as quickly as I could, and through some channel other than the front stairs and lobby. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Over Innsmouth 


ction scenes in films and books tend to fall in to one of two categories: fights or chases. The extended chase in The Shadow over Innsmouth (quoted above) is one of the most dynamic and 

memorable action sequences in Lovecraft’s work. A chase scene should provide just as much drama and excitement as combat. 
A chase is more than a simple test of speed; a good chase is made up of a string of dramatic locations that challenge the characters as they race through them. The characters may begin in a crowded marketplace before moving to narrow alleys, then climbing a fire escape, breaking through a window, pursuing each other through an apartment as a family eat lunch, and so on. 
The chase is played out in rounds (much like combat). As each character’s turn begins, the Keeper should describe the situation, then ask what actions the investigator is taking that round. Only then should the Keeper determine what dice rolls are required, the outcome of which should be incorporated in to the story, perhaps changing the situation faced by the next player. 
These rules assume the fleeing character has an escape route. If a character is trapped then they must escape before a chase can ensue. 
While some measure of gritty realism can be desirable, avoid becoming overly preoccupied with realism. Always bear in mind that the aim is to create dramatic fiction, not to mirror real-world physics. 
First, these rules will address a simple one-on-one chase. Later in this chapter, chases with multiple participants will be explored. These rules are intended for characters involved in any type of chase, whether running, swimming or flying, and for vehicles of any kind. 
The rules for chases are presented in five parts. 
Part 1: Establishing the chase: A method for gauging wheth­er or not a chase needs to be played out in full. In cases where the fleeing character is determined to be fast enough, the chase will go no further than Part 1. 
Part 2: Cut to the chase: Provides the Keeper with a system for laying out a chase, positioning all of the participants, and deciding the order of play and number of actions each participant can make. 
Part 3: Movement: This part covers the essential rules for movement and for dealing with the various hazards and barriers that might be encountered. 
Part 4: Conflict: Provides rules for resolving what happens when characters and vehicles try to grab, strike or collide with each other. 
Part 5: Supplementary chase rules: Part 5 contains a selec­tion of additional rules that complement parts 1 to 4. 
Part 1: Establishing the Chase 
If the fleeing character is significantly faster than his or her opponent, escape is likely, leaving the pursuer far behind; the chase will be over almost as soon as it has begun. A single skill roll for each character is used to establish the chase, the result yielding one of two options: 
G The fleeing character is faster than the pursuer, in which case it is assumed that the pursuer quickly falls behind and the chase is not played out. The Keeper simply describes how the pursuer loses their quarry in a way that fits the situation. 
G The pursuer is fast enough to catch the fleeing char­acter. If this is the case, the game picks up the action at the most exciting moment—the point where the pursuer is closing in on the fleeing character. 
Speed Roll 
This roll adjusts each participant’s MOV rating for the duration of this chase. Every vehicle and character has a movement rating (MOV). A vehicle’s speed depends on a driver’s skill, while a character’s “foot” speed depends on their physical condition. 
Each participant in the chase makes a CON roll (if on foot or other self-propelled mode) to test his or her physical condition and endurance. Drivers make a Drive Auto roll (for vehicles) to test their handling of the vehicle. 
G On a success: no change to MOV rating for the duration of this chase. 
G On an extreme success: +1 to MOV rating for the duration of this chase. 
G On a failure: –1 to MOV rating for the duration of this chase. 
Compare Speeds 
The fleeing character escapes if their adjusted MOV is higher than their pursuer. The Keeper is free to narrate a brief explanation of how this occurs, or to ask the players for suggestions. The chase is over and the Keeper should move the game on. 
If the pursuer’s adjusted MOV rating is equal to or great­er than that of the fleeing character’s a chase is established, and the chase rules are bought in to play. Proceed with Part 
2:Cut to the chase. 

Part 2: Cut to the Chase 
If the fleeing character’s MOV was not high enough to lose the pursuer, the Keeper should move the action on to the point at which pursuer is just two locations behind, regardless of how the chase started. This short range serves to focus play on the exciting part of the chase. Whether the characters started next to each other or a mile apart, the aim is to “cut to the chase”. The fleeing character has already had one chance to escape using the speed roll. The Keeper would normally set the starting range to two locations, but may opt for a tenser chase by reducing it to one location in exceptional circumstances. It is advised not to set the range beyond two locations. 

Locations 
"A" location is the term used to denote position in the chase. The locations do not need to be equally spaced; a locked door or a flight of stairs might separate two locations, while another might be a point on a stretch of open road. Loca­tions divide the chase in to narrative chunks, rather than being a set physical distance. For example, a hotel might be divided into multiple locations: revolving door, crowded foyer, stairs, lifts, corridors, restaurant, kitchens, bedrooms, offices, and so on. 
If a chase takes place at the same time as a separate combat, the Keeper should ensure that the distance between locations is not excessive, otherwise you may end up with one group of characters running the length of a city block in the time it takes another investigator to smash a chair over a cultist’s head. 
A chase is made up of a string of locations. The Keeper should keep careful track of which character is at which location. Depending on their speed, characters may move 1 or more locations each round. Hazards and barriers (see following) are positioned between locations and may slow a character’s progress. 


Keeping Track of the Chase 
When running a chase scene you may find the following method useful for tracking the various characters. 
Take a blank sheet of paper or whiteboard. Draw a line of dots half an inch apart. Each dot represents one location. Label the first dot with a letter representing the pursuer. Then write a letter for the fleeing character two dots on from the pursuer, depending on the opening range (see Cut to the Chase). As characters move, simply cross out their marker and draw it on its new position. 

The Chase Round 
Just as with combat, a chase takes place in rounds and the characters act in DEX order. A combat round and a chase round are interchangeable. 
Dexterity and the Order of Movement 
The question of who gets the first opportunity to act can be an important issue in a chase. Determine the order of 
*Note that some monsters are capable of multiple attacks in one round; these all take place on the monster’s turn. 
A character may elect to delay acting until another character has acted. If this leads to more than one character wishing to act simultaneously, the one with the highest DEX takes priority. If both insist on waiting for the other, the round may end with neither of them acting. 
Pushing Rolls in a Chase 
Pushed rolls are not used in a chase. As in combat, a charac­ter usually has the opportunity for another attempt on the following round. 
Part 3: Movement 
movement by ranking the characters’ DEX from highest to lowest. In the case of a draw, use an opposed DEX roll to decide who goes first. 
The Movement Actions 
Each character gets a number of movement actions per round. Movement actions are used to move from one lo­cation to the next. Faster characters get more movement actions each round than slower characters. 
Every character and vehicle gets one movement action by default. To this is added the difference between their movement rating (MOV) and the movement rating of the slowest participant in the chase. Thus the slowest partici­pant will always have one movement action; someone with a MOV that is 1 above the slowest participant will have 2 movement actions, someone with a MOV that is 2 above the slowest participant will have 3 movement actions, and so on. 

Moving From One Location to the Next 
If an area is free of hazards, such as an empty corridor or stretch of clear straight road, the cost of moving from one location to the next is 1 movement action. 

Actions in a Chase Round 
On their turn in the DEX order (highest to lowest) each character may use their turn to: i Move forward in the chase (spending movement actions to do so). 
i Initiate one attack* using the Fighting, Firearms or 
Drive Auto skill. 

Hazards 
i Cast a spell. A chase that takes place on even, clear ground will soon be resolved if the pursuer is faster than the character he or 
i Perform some other action requiring time and per­she is chasing; or, if both are of the same MOV speed, the haps a dice roll, such as picking a lock. 
chase might never end, with one character staying just out of range of the other. Either way, this leads to a bland chase 

Caught trying to flee out the window. 
scene based purely upon numbers. 
Hazards add spice to a chase scene: hairpin bends, slip­pery steps, thorny bushes, thick mud, and so on. Hazards typically slow characters and vehicles down, and if badly handled, can also cause harm. 
The Keeper should present the hazard and allow each character to decide how they deal with it. Skill is always factor, and sometimes taking a cautious approach, slowing down in order to make a more considered attempt, can help. Other times, a reckless approach might be taken to use brute force and speed, such as when breaking down a locked door or taking corners at speed. 
If a character elects to take a cautious approach, move­ment actions may be spent to gain bonus dice on the skill roll to negotiate a hazard. 1 movement action buys 1 bonus die, or 2 movement actions buys 2 bonus dice (2 bonus dice is the maximum that can be rolled). If the skill roll is successful the character or vehicle is not further delayed or damaged by the hazard and is free to move on. 
If the skill roll to negotiate a hazard is failed, the Keeper should decide if damage is inflicted on the character or vehi­cle, and how much, using Table III: Other forms of damage as a guide for damage to characters, or Vehicular collisions (see page @@) for damage to vehicles. Failing to negotiate an obstacle or taking damage is also likely to slow the character or vehicle; roll 1D3 for number of lost movement actions. 
Notice how a hazard is written in the space between two dots. The dots represent the locations on either side of the hazard. Thus, in the example nearby, the area labeled “mud” is a hazard for those travelling from one location to the next. After negotiating a hazard a character should move on to the next location whether they pass or fail the skill roll. 

Skills and Hazards 
The Keeper will specify a skill or choice of skills that can be used to negotiate a hazard, along with a difficulty level. The Keeper should welcome suggestions from players for alternative ways in which their investigators might negotiate obstacles, and, as always, the Keeper is final arbiter of what skill is acceptable. Some examples of appropriate skills are: 
G Climb skill to get over fences and walls, or to climb down from a high window. 
G Swim skill to cross a river or lake. 
G Dodge skill to weave through a crowd or avoid fall­ing over trashcans in a narrow alley. 
G STR to wade through thick mud. 
G DEX to run along the top of a wall without falling off. 
G Drive Auto is the appropriate skill in a car chase. 

This list is not exhaustive; other skills may be used if judged appropriate. 

Sample Hazards for Car Chases G Traffic jam with room to weave between vehicles. G Performing a U-turn or bootlegger reverse. G Roadwork that causes an obstruction. G Road traffic accident. G Pedestrian crossing. G Busy junction. G Cyclists in the road. G Sharp bends or pot holes. G Animals (deer, goats, sheep) on the road. G Other vehicles pulling out or stopping suddenly. G Fallen rocks and debris on the road. G Narrow road between a cliff and a drop. G Slow-moving delivery vehicles and refuse collec­
tion trucks. 

G Pedestrianized area. 
G Two men carrying a large sheet of glass across the 
street. 

G A marketplace or building site. 
G A large stack of cardboard boxes. 
G Overtaking a vehicle on a narrow road or in the face 
of oncoming traffic. 

G Heading off road or through a field. 
G An oncoming vehicle (a hazard can move). 
Sample Hazards for Foot Chases G A low fence or wall. G A latched window. G A river, lake or muddy swamp. G A crowded street. G A narrow alley. G A rooftop. G A hole in a wall. G A crawlspace. G A crawlspace,  junk-filled attic, or cellar. G A spiral staircase. G Between the stacks of a library or museum. 

Summary: Five Steps to Setting Up a Chase 
To sum up, there are five steps for the Keeper to perform when setting up a chase: 
G Place the pursuer. 
G Place the fleeing character. 
G Position hazards and barriers. 
G Allocate each participant a number of move­
ment actions. G Determine DEX order. 

Barriers 
Barriers block progress until they have been successfully negotiated or removed. A barrier might be a locked door, a tall fence, an abyss, etc. The distinction between a hazard and a barrier may sometimes be unclear. Climbing over a 4-foot fence may be hazardous, but would not stop a determined person, whereas climbing over a 7-foot wall may well present a barrier. Climbing up to a second-floor window would pres­ent a barrier (if one fails to climb, the window is out of reach), whereas climbing down is a hazard (one can always simply fall). The Keeper must decide when a hazard constitutes a barrier; if it is a barrier it prevents further movement until the skill roll is passed or the barrier is broken through. Failing a skill roll to pass a barrier may cause damage and delay as a hazard does, but the usual consequence is simply the delay and inconvenience of not moving to the next location. 
Skills and Barriers 
G Jump skill to leap across a chasm or jump from one roof to another. 
G STR to force open a door. 
G Locksmith skill to open a locked door or window. 
There can be more than one way to get past some barriers. A locked door might be picked (using Locksmith skill) or smashed open (see Breaking down barriers below). Equally, some characters might seek to climb over a fence (Climb skill) while others might simply smash their way through. 
Sample Barriers for Car Chases 
G Traffic jam with no room to weave between vehicles. 

"What are you doing?! Get out of the street!" 
G Police roadblock. 
G A fallen tree. 
G A rockslide. 
Sample Barriers for Foot Chases 
G A high fence or wall. 
G A chasm. 
G A locked door. 
Breaking down barriers 
Whether it be kicking down a locked door or ramming through a police roadblock, sometimes brute force is the best solution. No attack roll is required. For each point of their build, vehicles inflict 1D10 damage to a barrier. 
Vehicles are assumed to be travelling at high speed when attempting to break through a barrier; therefore, if a vehicle attacks a barrier and fails to destroy it, the vehicle is wrecked. If the barrier is destroyed, the vehicle suffers an amount of 


damage equal to half the barrier’s hit points prior to impact. 

When a barrier is reduced to 0 hit points it is no longer a barrier. The debris that results from smashing a barrier may present a hazard to those that follow afterwards. 
Sample barriers hit points: G Internal door or thin wooden fence: 5 hit points. 
G Standard back door: 10 hit points. 
G Strong domestic external door: 15 hit points. 
G 9” brick wall: 25 hit points. 
G Mature tree: 50 hit points. 
G Concrete bridge support: 100 hit points. 
Part 4: Conflict 
The characters or vehicles must be on the same location to attack one another, unless firearms are involved. Initiating an attack costs 1 movement action. Characters are limited to their usual number of attacks per round. Attacks are resolved as they are in regular combat. 
A character should always be given the opportunity to respond when challenged (fighting back or dodging) regard­less of whether they have any movement actions remaining. 
Large monsters or creatures might attack a vehicle aim­ing to inflict damage or to use a fighting maneuver to push, tip or even pick up and throw a vehicle (see Builds, page @@). 
Vehicles may engage in combat using the regular combat rules, substituting Drive Auto skill for both Fighting and Dodge skills. Treat the vehicle as a weapon that inflicts 1D10 damage per point of build. Each full 10 hit points of damage decreases a vehicle’s build by one point (round down); any remaining damage below 10 points is ignored. Whenever a vehicle is used to inflict damage, it also suffers an amount of damage equal to half (round down) of that which it delivers, but never enough to cause it to lose a greater amount of build points than the target which it hit originally possessed. 

If a character is attacked with a vehicle, that character may fight back or dodge. Successfully fighting back allows the target character to avoid an attack and simultaneously land one of their own. An investigator’s attack on a vehicle is likely to be relatively ineffective; on the other hand, if it is dark young that is fighting back against a vehicle, it may be a different story. 
Using Fighting Maneuvers in a Chase 
If a character or vehicle seeks to trip, push or otherwise cause their opponent to lose control, this can be achieved with a fighting maneuver. A successful fighting maneuver causes the same outcome as failing a skill roll for a hazard: 1D3 movement actions are lost and, if appropriate to the situation, an amount of damage is selected from Table III: Other forms of damage for characters, or Table VI: Vehicu­lar Collisions for vehicles. Alternatively, if a character has a specific goal he or she wishes to set for a fighting maneuver, this can be done in the way it would in regular combat (see Fighting maneuvers, page @@). 
A fighting maneuver can be made against a vehicle to push it off the road or cause a loss of control. The same limitations regarding build apply: if a vehicle challenges another vehicle that is 1 build larger that itself, 1 penalty die is applied to the attack roll. If the target vehicle is 2 build points larger, 2 penalty dice are applied. If the target vehicle is 3 build points larger, the maneuver is impossible, as the size difference is too great. 



Part 5: Optional Rules 
“They’re coming to get you, Barbra.” —George A. Romero, Night of the Living Dead 
Parts 1 to 4 have covered all of the essential chase rules. This final part includes optional rules that can be used to embellish and further develop chases. 
Choosing a Route 
It is the nature of a chase that the character being chased (the quarry) wants nothing other than to escape and must make split-second decisions whether to turn left or right. If there is a choice of routes available, the lead character is free to choose and may seek a more difficult path or an easier one, especially if he or she feels it would be to their advan­tage to do so. For example, a strong swimmer might opt to leap in to the river to lose their pursuer. If the investigator is the one being pursued then the Keeper should regularly present a choice of routes. 
Random Hazards and Barriers 
It would be very easy for the Keeper to stack the odds against the players by describing new terrain that constantly works against the investigators. You may find it more fun all round to create hazards and barriers randomly. 
Roll 1D100: 
01-59 = Clear 
60+ = 1 Regular hazard/barrier 
85+ = 1 Hard hazard/barrier 
96+ = 1 Extreme hazard /barrier 
If the environment is especially hazardous, such as driving through rush hour traffic in a bustling city or along country lanes at midnight, add a penalty die to the roll for random hazards and barriers. 
If the environment is unlikely to have any dangers or 
Conflict often arises in the middle of a chase. 

delays, such as driving down a quiet freeway, add a bonus die to the roll for random hazards and barriers. 
Sudden Hazards 
Just because an area is free of hazards one moment does not mean that it will remain that way. A car may suddenly pull out, a pedestrian might run in to the road without looking, someone might come running around the corner from the opposite direction, a loose dog might assault a fleeing inves­tigator, and so on. 
At any point in the chase round, either the Keeper or a player may call for a group Luck roll. If the Luck roll is passed, events unfold in the player’s favor; the players may dictate where and when a sudden hazard occurs. If the Luck roll is failed, this indicates a sudden hazard for the investiga­tors, presented by the Keeper. 
Sudden hazards should be of Regular difficulty. Players and Keeper should alternate in calling for Luck rolls for sud­den hazards. If the players call for a Luck roll for a sudden hazard, they may not call for one again until after the Keeper has called for one and vice versa. Either side may call for the first sudden hazard in a chase. 
If a chase is becoming a long drawn out affair, the Keeper may decide to raise the level of difficulty of sudden hazards. 
Pedal to the Metal 
When spending a movement action to move a vehicle forward, instead of moving just 1 location, the vehicle can accelerate and move between 2 and 5 locations for the same cost of 1 movement action. 
The listed MOV speeds for vehicles are relatively low, only a few points above those of a pedestrian. Of course, vehicles can travel much faster than pedestrians. A vehicle has the option of accelerating; any one of its movement actions can be spent to travel multiple locations. Travelling at higher speeds has its downside of course, making hazards more difficult to negotiate. 


G As normal, a driver can use 1 movement action to move 1 location. 
G A driver can elect to move 2 or 3 locations with one movement action. Any hazards encountered have one penalty die applied to the skill rolls. 
G A driver can elect to move 4 or 5 locations with one movement action. Any hazards encountered have two penalty dice applied to the skill rolls. 
The increase in speed must be announced prior to mov­ing. Just as in real life, driving at speed is less risky if one has a good view of what lies on the road ahead. How far a driver can see at any time is wholly dependent on the situ­ation and environment in which the chase is taking place. In a crowded city, one might only be able to see a couple of locations ahead (1D3 if you wish to determine it randomly); in the suburbs one can see several locations ahead (1D6 if you wish to determine it randomly), and in the country, on a straight road, one might see a considerable distance (1D10 locations if you wish to determine it randomly). The Keeper 

Harvey is being chased by the police. 
may not have determined what these upcoming locations are, and should do so as required. 
Once a decision has been made to accelerate and travel a number of locations on one movement action, it cannot be retracted; the vehicle will travel the full distance (2, 3, 4 or 5 locations) or until it fails a hazard roll. If a hazard roll is failed, the outcome is resolved, after which any further movement must be paid for and started afresh. 
Any penalty dice for acceleration should be applied to hazards, but usually not when breaking through barriers, for which increased speed can be beneficial. 
This increased speed can be used multiple times in one chase round. By putting the pedal to the metal, a car with 4 movement actions could potentially move 20 locations in one chase round. 
Escaping the Pursuer 
The pursuer can continue chasing the fleeing character so long as their location or direction of travel can be identified. Each chase is unique, with its own string of locations, so judgments must be made about points where the pursuer might lose the quarry. 


Hiding 
A Fleeing character can attempt to hide from the pursuer at any point in the chase. Clearly, having a longer lead will pro­vide more time in which to hide. The Keeper should weigh up the situation as with any skill roll before setting a diffi­culty level. If the pursuer fails to find the hidden investigator with a Spot Hidden roll, the quarry has evaded capture. 
Hiding a vehicle is not easy, but if there are hiding places and the vehicle has sufficient lead, it may be attempted. A combined Stealth and Drive Auto skill roll (Combined rolls, page @@) is used to hide a vehicle, with the roll needing to succeed against both skills. 

Passengers 
Passengers do not make a speed roll and do not have move­ment actions. They may act once on their turn in the DEX order. Typically, vehicle passengers might use firearms or throw things out of the car to obstruct those following. 
One passenger can assist the driver with navigation, reading maps and offering advice on how to negotiate haz­ards. If a passenger uses their action to assist the driver in this way they may make one Spot Hidden or Navigate skill roll. If successful, on the vehicle’s next move, the vehicle can accelerate once with 1 fewer penalty die (see Pedal to the metal, page @@). Thus, the vehicle might advance up to 3 locations with no penalty die, or up to 5 with 1 penalty die. 
Ranged Attacks During a Chase 
Firearms can be used during a chase: 
If a character on foot stops for a moment, he or she may use a firearm as normal. The options are as for one combat round of gunfire (i.e. one shot with a rifle, up to three shots with a handgun, etc.) This option costs 1 movement action, but no movement is made. 
If a character is continuing to race (on foot or in a vehi­cle), any firearms attack rolls are made with one additional penalty die. Taking shots in this manner does not affect a character’s performance in the chase. The options for firing are otherwise the same as for one combat round. This op­tion does not cost any additional movement actions. 
Vehicle tires may be targeted with gunfire: apply an addi­tional penalty die to target tires due to their small size. Tires have an armor value of 3 and are only damaged by impaling weapons. If a tire takes 2 points of damage, it bursts. A burst tire reduces a vehicle’s build by 1 point. 
The Keeper should judge the ranges for firearms. Both driver and passengers gain protection from a vehicle’s ar­mor. The amount of armor is listed on Table V: Vehicles. 
Driver Damage
 If the driver of a moving vehicle suffers a major wound and remains conscious, he or she may still lose control of their vehicle and must roll immediately as for a Hazard at Hard difficulty level. A driver who falls unconscious due to a major wound automatically loses control of the vehicle. 

Dealing with a Location in an Alternative Way 
A character may choose to interact with a location in an alternative or unexpected way. For example, if a location is described as “an empty residential street”, the assumption may be that the quarry will run down it. Instead of this, they might decide to run to the nearest door and attempt to open it (by force if need be). If it fits the story then go with it. 
Characters Joining a Chase in Progress 
Any characters who join an ongoing chase should make a speed roll to determine their MOV rate. The Keeper should then position them on an appropriate location. 
A character who joins a chase as a pursuer needs a MOV rate that is at least equal to the slowest fleeing character. If they fail to achieve this, they can be ignored. 



A Hunting Horror chases two cars on a mountain road. 
If a character joining a chase as a fleeing character has a MOV rate that is slower than the previously slowest member of the chase, some adjustment is required; the number of move­ment actions that everyone in the chase has should be recal­culated. Every character gets one movement action by default, plus one movement action for each point by which their MOV rate exceeds that of the new slowest participant in the chase. 
There is no need to recalculate speeds or movement actions when a character leaves a chase. 
Switching Between Modes of Movement 
There are a variety of modes of movement in the game. Some creatures have alternate speeds listed for flying or swimming. If no alternate MOV rating is listed, the Keeper may allow for the character to use half of their standard MOV, providing the mode of movement is one that the character can perform. Thus a human with MOV 8 would have MOV 4 when swimming, but would not have a MOV rating for flying. 
When characters change between modes of movement that continue to use their own physical body for propulsion, a fresh speed roll is not required. Simply adjust their MOV accordingly, remembering that they may be at either +1 or -1, depending on whether they achieved an Extreme success on or failed their speed roll (CON) at the start of the chase (see Establishing the chase, page @@). 

Characters that switch from being on foot (or other self-propelled mode) to driving a car should make a fresh speed roll using Drive Auto skill. When a character becomes a pedes­trian, he or she should make a fresh speed roll using CON. 
If the character’s speed (MOV) is changed, their number of movement actions should be altered. Refer to Characters joining a chase in progress (see page @@). 
Characters Creating Hazards 
Investigators, monsters and non-player characters may create hazards or barriers through their actions during play. Doing so will usually require the expenditure of a move­ment action (for the time required), a skill roll (to achieve it) or both. The following ideas are examples of what might be attempted, and the Keeper should judge each situation on its own merits. 
G Pausing to secure a door with a bolt or key would cost 1 movement action but no skill roll. 


G Pausing to secure a door using Locksmith skill would require a whole chase round and a successful skill roll. 
G Moving a heavy wardrobe against a door would require a STR roll and a movement action. 
G Upending a fruit stall to cause a delay might only cost 1 movement action. 
G Firing a gun to cause a crowd to panic would require a Luck roll. If failed, the action causes more trouble than it is worth. If successful, the crowd presents a hazard for those following. 
G Yelling, “Stop that man, he’s a thief,” at bystanders, hoping they might assist, would call for a Fast Talk or Intimidate skill roll. 

Players may also take equally creative approaches to negotiating hazards. 
Splitting Up 
Characters in a chase may choose to take different routes. If so, you now have an additional chase to track. 
Monsters in a Chase 
The majority of monsters and animals act the same way as people in a chase. Some have abilities that may exempt them from certain skill rolls; for example, those that fly would not need to make Jump or Climb rolls. 
Many monsters, animals and non-player characters will lack listed values for the various skills that might be called upon in a chase (Jump, Swim, Drive Auto, etc.) In such cases the Keeper should use the following as a guide: 
G Where the monster or non-player character has an implied aptitude, use their DEX in place of the skill. 
G Where the monster or non-player character has an implied ineptitude, use one-fifth of their DEX in place of the skill (or simply rule the attempt to be an 
automatic failure). 
"Somebody! Help meee!" 

G Where the monster or non-player character has neither implied aptitude nor ineptitude, use half of their DEX in place of the skill. 
If other skills are required, the Keeper might use a similar approach, using what he or she feels to be the most appropriate characteristic. For example, should you wish to determine the Spot Hidden skill of a particular monster (for whom there is no listed Spot Hidden skill), INT might be judged most appropriate; use either its full INT, half of its INT or one-fifth of its INT depending on how perceptive you feel the monster to be. 

Fleeing the Scene 
You may have a scene in which you wish to gauge how far the investigators manage to flee in a limited time. The chase rules can be used for this, counting the number of locations moved within a specified number of rounds. 

The following vehicles use the Drive Auto skill. 
Vehicle MOV Build Armor for Passengers people 
Car, economy 13 4 1 3 or 4 
Car, standard 14 5 2 4 Car, deluxe 15 6 2 4 Sports car 16 5 2 1 Pickup truck 14 6 2 2+ 6-ton truck 13 7 2 2+ 18-wheeler 13 9 2 3+ 
Motorcycle, light 13 1 0 1 Motorcycle, heavy 16 3 0 1 
Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require a substantial crew. 
Air Vehicles MOV Build Armor for Passengers people 
Dirigible 12 10 2 112+ 
Propeller plane 15 5 1 4+ Bomber plane 17 11 2 10+ Jet plane 18 11 3 50+ Helicopter 15 5 2 15+ 
Vehicles on the following chart require specialist training to oper­ate; the skill Operate Heavy Machinery might be substituted. 
Heavy Vehicles MOV Build Armor Passengers for people 
Tank 1120 24 4 Steam train 12 12 1 400+ Modern train 15 14 2 400+ 
Vehicles on the following chart use the Ride skill. 
Other forms of MOV Build Armor for Passengers transport people 
Horse (with 11 4 0 1 rider) 4-horse carriage 10 3 0 6+ Bicycle 7 0.5 0 1 

Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require a substantial crew. The armor value is for those on deck. 
MOV  Build  Armor for  Passengers  
people  
6  2  0  3  
12  4  0  22  
14  3  0  6  
11  32  0  2200+  
11  65  0  1800+  
11  75  0  3200+  
12  24  0  120+  

Key 

MOV: A rating of the vehicle’s speed and maneuverability in chases. These ratings are for modern vehicles and may be re­duced by around 20% for 1920s vehicles (though there were cars in the 1920s that could exceed 100 MPH). Build: A rating of the strength and size of the vehicle. When reduced to zero, the vehicle is out of action. Each full 10 hit points of damage decreases a vehicle’s build by 1 point (round down); damage below 10 hit points is ignored. 
If a vehicle’s build is reduced to half (round down) of its starting value or lower, it is impaired; one penalty die is applied to all Drive Auto (or appropriate skill) rolls. 
If a vehicle takes damage equal to its full build value in one incident, the vehicle is completely wrecked in an impressive manner. It may explode, burn, roll or suffer some combination thereof. All occupants of the vehicle are likely to die. Whether or not investigators have a chance of survival is up to the Keeper: Luck rolls may be allowed. Those who are fortunate get thrown free, though it is recommended they take at least 2D10 damage. 
If a vehicle’s build is otherwise reduced to zero by cumulative damage (i.e. in increments of less than the vehicle’s starting build value), it becomes undrivable, grinding to a halt. Depending on the situation (and perhaps a Luck roll) this may lead to an acci­dent resulting in 1D10 damage for the driver and each passenger. Armor for people: The armor rating is for the passengers and driver, reflecting the number of points of armor the vehicle pro­vides against external attacks. Passengers and crew: The number of people that can be ac­commodated. 



Vehicular Collisions 
When a skill roll to negotiate a hazard is failed, the Keeper must consider the cause and the likely damage, and rate it against the left-hand column on Table VI: Vehicular Colli­sions. If unsure, simply use the defaults of “minor incident” for a Regular difficulty level hazard, “moderate incident” for a Hard difficulty level hazard, or “severe incident” for Extreme difficulty level hazards. 
The damage should also be rolled for each occupant of a vehicle involved in a collision, substituting “hit points” in place of “build”. Thus, a car that is in a moderate incident suffers 1D6 build damage and each occupant of the car suffers 1D6 hit points of damage. 
Most collisions should also result in a delay as the vehicle skids or loses speed (costing 1D3 movement actions). 
Stealing a car might attract unwanted attention. 
Chases in the Air and Sea 
Chases can take place in any environment, and the Keeper should create new hazards and barriers appropriately. For example, at sea: rocks, shallows, buoys, waves, strong winds, etc. Or, for example, in the air: clouds, tall buildings, birds, cables, anti-aircraft fire, etc. 
MOV Rates 
The MOV rate is used as a measure of relative speeds. One point of MOV is significant in a chase; it allows for one additional movement action, and for this reason, the scale of MOV rating to speed is not linear. Each point of MOV equates with an approximate increase in speed of around 50%. 
The MOV rating of a creature is not necessarily their maximum speed over a short distance, but is intended to represent their overall speed in a chase. For example, a world class sprinter can achieve MOV 11 over 100 meters, but 12 MPH (MOV 9) would be a more realistic speed for a fit human over distance, equating to a 5-minute mile. 
Chases with Multiple Characters 
When running a chase with multiple characters, the only significant difference lies in the initial phase; Establishing the chase (see page @@). 
First, decide who is chasing whom and whether the fleeing characters are staying together or splitting up. If they split up there will be multiple chases and each chase should be tracked and resolved separately. 
Each character involved in a chase makes a speed roll (using either Drive Auto or CON) to establish their MOV rate for the chase (see Speed roll, page @@). Once this is done, list the participants of the chase in speed order in their two groups: pursuers and fleeing characters. 

Next, eliminate those not in the chase: 
Any fleeing characters who are fast­er than their fastest pursuer may escape the chase entirely if they wish to. 
Any pursuers who are slower than the slowest fleeing character are left be­hind, and do not participate in the case. 
The two groups are now positioned in order of their MOV ratings. 
1.
 Place the pursuers: Start with the slowest pursuer, right at the back of the chase. Then place each of the other pursuers a number of locations ahead of him or her, equal to their difference in MOV speeds. Once all of the pursuers are placed, move on to the fleeing char­acters. 

2.
Place the fleeing characters: As with a one-on-one chase, position a fleeing character (the slowest one) 2 locations ahead of the foremost pursuer. Then place each of the other fleeing char­acters a number of locations ahead of slowest fleeing character, equal to their difference in MOV speeds. 

3.
 Position hazards: Note down any hazards, barriers or other landmarks. 

4.
Movement actions: Determine how many movement actions each character has. 




Table VI: Vehicular Collisions 
Incident Minor incident: 
Most Regular Hazards. May be cosmetic damage only, possibly something serious. 
Moderate incident: 
Most Hard Hazards. Might cause major damage. Might wreck a car. . 
Severe incident: 
Most Extreme Haz­ards. Likely to wreck a car outright. 
Mayhem: Likely to wreck a truck outright. Almost certain to wreck a car. 
Road kill: Most vehicles will be little more than scattered debris. 
Damage 
1D3-1 
Build 
1D6 
Build 
1D10 
Build 
2D10 
Build 
5D10 
Build 
Examples 
Glancing blow from another vehicle, grazing a lamppost, hitting a post, colliding with person or similar-sized creature. 
Hitting a cow or large deer, collision with a heavy motorbike or economy car. 
Collision with a standard car, lamp post or tree. 
Collision with a truck or coach or a mature tree. 
Collision with a juggernaut or a train, hit by a meteor. 
5. Determine DEX order: List participants in DEX order, fastest to slowest. 




An Example from The Call of Cthulhu 
In Lovecraft’s story, Cthulhu is temporarily thwarted as Johansen reverses the Alert in to him. Could this be done with the Call of Cthulhu game rules? Let’s put Johansen in the role of an investigator, and decide the boat is Build 22 and a MOV of 11 (as for a battleship). Cthulhu has Build 22 and a MOV of 14 (swimming). Both Cthulhu and Johansen make their speed rolls and both roll an Extreme success. The boat has a MOV of 12, Cthulhu has a MOV of 15. Cthulhu acts first in the DEX order and has 4 movement actions each round. Johansen goes second with 1 movement action. Let’s give Johansen a Pilot (Boat) skill of 70%. Cthulhu’s Fighting skill is 100%. 
Cthulhu’s turn: Cthulhu uses 2 movement actions to catch up with the Alert. With his third movement action he at­tempts to sink the ship. Johansen responds by fighting back, and wishes to use a fighting maneuver. His goal is to, “To drive Cthulhu back long enough for me to escape”. 
The Keeper rolls 34 for his Fighting skill—a Hard suc­cess for Great Cthulhu as he attempts to wreck the ship. The player rolls 14—an Extreme success for Johansen’s Pilot Ship skill. Johansen wins. The Keeper considers the outcome; the aim was to set the enemy back to provide time for escape. The Keeper forgoes the damage roll, but rolls 3 (1D3) for number of movement actions that Cthulhu loses. The Keeper describes how Cthulhu appears to burst, releas­ing an unspeakable stench as of a thousand opened graves. Cthulhu is pushed back 1 location, and his final movement action this round and his first two next round are lost as a result of Johansen’s fighting maneuver. 
Johansen’s turn: Johansen has only 1 movement action and applies full-steam ahead, accelerating forward through 5 locations with his one movement action. The Keeper does not place any hazards in his way and Johansen is now 6 lo­cations ahead. As he flees, Johansen looks over his shoulder to see Cthulhu nebulously recombining far behind the ship! Cthulhu cannot catch him next round and the Keeper rules that Johansen has escaped. 
Johansen used his steamboat to ram Cthulhu and escape from the Great Old One. 


But I must try to tell what I thought I saw that night under the mocking yellow moon—saw surging and hopping down the Rowley road in plain sight in front of me as I crouched among the wild brambles of that desolate railway cut. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Over Innsmouth 



nvestigators begin the game sane and rational; however, during their investigations they will encounter otherworldly horrors, alien creatures and the terrible cosmic truths of the Cthulhu Mythos—all of which will challenge 

their state of mind and sense of normality, and push them to very edge of sanity. In some cases, the expe­rience will be too much and the unfortunate investigator will descend into periods of temporary, indefinite or even permanent madness. 
Each investigator has Sanity points that can rise and fall during play. Sanity is used to determine whether the inves­tigator can withstand the horrors of the Cthulhu Mythos, as well as stand up to fear-inducing situations without turning tail and running away. Loss of Sanity points can lead to insanity. When Sanity points are reduced to zero, an investigator is permanently and incurably insane, and ceases to be a player character. 
Sanity in the game is modeled after the behavior of pro­tagonists in H.P. Lovecraft’s fiction who, more often than not, faint or go mad when confronted with mind-bending physics and monstrous entities from beyond space and time. Sanity is the game’s register of the investigator’s flexibility and resilience to emotional trauma. Characters that start with a high number of Sanity points find it easier to ra­tionalize traumatic events or to repress horrific memories. Those with a lower number of Sanity points are mentally fragile and more susceptible to emotional upset. While the cosmic horror of the Cthulhu Mythos is the fundamental assault on the mind of an investigator, other gruesome and comparatively ordinary sights and events can also cause emotional disturbance. 
In an unnerving or horrifying situation the Keeper will test the resiliency and emotional strength of the investiga­tors. This is done by calling for a Sanity roll for each in­vestigator entangled in the situation. Investigator insanity is triggered when too many Sanity points are lost in too short a time, causing temporary or indefinite insanity. 
Sanity Points and SAN Rolls 
Sanity points should be tracked carefully, as the number can change up and down throughout the game. When investi­gators encounter a sanity-threatening situation, the Keeper may call for a Sanity roll. Each player whose investigator experiences this source of horror rolls 1D100. A success is a roll equal to or less than the investigator’s current Sanity points. Bonus dice and penalty dice are not applied to Sanity rolls (with one exception, Self-help, page @@). 
Note: If using the optional rule for spending Luck points, these may not be spent on Sanity rolls. 
A successful roll means that the investigator loses no Sanity points, or only a minimal amount. A failed Sanity roll always means the investigator loses Sanity points. The amount lost depends on the spell, book, entity or situation encountered. 
The Mythos is an anathema to the human mind. In published Call of Cthulhu scenarios, Sanity loss rolls are shown as two numbers or rolls separated by a slash, for instance: SAN 1/1D4+1. The number to the left of the slash is the number of Sanity points lost if the Sanity roll succeeds. The die roll to the right of the slash is the number of Sanity points lost if the Sanity roll is failed. Sometimes this may be written as SAN 0/1D4; in this particular case, a successful Sanity roll means no Sanity points are lost, but if the roll is failed, the investigator loses 1D4 Sanity points. Failing a Sanity roll always causes the investigator to lose self-control for a moment, at which point the Keeper should choose an involuntary action for the investigator. For example: T Jump in fright—causing the investigator to drop something (spectacles, flashlight, gun, book, etc.) 
T Cry out in terror—drawing attention, saying some­thing inappropriate. 
T Involuntary movement—swerving the steering wheel dangerously to one side, throwing up one’s hands in horror, cringing. 
T Involuntary combat action—if a Sanity roll is failed during a combat round, the investigator’s action for that round may be dictated by the Keeper; for example, lashing out with a fist, squeezing a trigger, taking shelter behind someone else. 
T Freeze—stare disbelievingly for a moment but take no action. 
A fumbled Sanity roll results in the character losing the maximum Sanity points for that particular situation or encounter. 
Losing more than a few Sanity points at one time may cause an investigator to go insane, as described later. 
When encountering one ghoul, the Sanity point loss is 0/1D6. It is the same when encountering multiple ghouls; the sanity effect is for the encounter rather than each ghoul seen. 

Maximum Sanity 
The threat of insanity in Call of Cthulhu characterizes the Cthulhu Mythos in a way that allows no compromise. Exposed to it, few sane humans freely choose the Mythos, for the Mythos is intrinsically loathsome and foul. The con­nection of Sanity points and Cthulhu Mythos skill points emphasizes the power of the Mythos, which corrupts and ruins by proximity and association. 
An investigator’s Sanity points may rise and fall during play; however, it may never rise above the character’s maxi­mum Sanity rating. Each investigator has a maximum San­ity point value that begins at 99. Knowledge of the Cthulhu Mythos always lowers an investigator’s maximum Sanity points. Maximum Sanity points equal 99 minus current Cthulhu Mythos points (99–Cthulhu Mythos skill). 
When gaining Cthulhu Mythos skill points, the player should decrease the investigator’s maximum Sanity by the same amount. 

Insanity 
From that point forward my impressions are scarcely to be 

relied on—indeed, I still possess a final, desperate hope that 
they all form parts of some daemonic dream or illusion born 
of delirium. A fever raged in my brain, and everything came to me through a kind of haze—sometimes only intermittently. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Out Of Time 
In Call of Cthulhu, insanity is induced by traumatic experi­ences and the ghastly comprehension that connects to the Cthulhu Mythos. The duration of the insane state depends upon the number or proportion of Sanity points lost. 
Three states of insanity can result: temporary, indefinite, and permanent. 
Regardless of whether the insanity is temporary or in­definite, it will consist of three distinct game phases: 
First: the insanity begins with a brief “bout of madness”, during which the player’s control of their investigator is compromised (see Insanity Phase 1: A bout of Madness, page @@). 
Second: the bout of madness is followed by a period of underlying insanity, during which the player retains full control of their investigator; however, the investigator is prone to delusions, phobias and further bouts of madness (see Insanity Phase 2: Underlying Insanity, page @@). 
Third: the final phase is recovery (see Treatment and Recov­ery from Insanity, page @@). 
Temporary Insanity 
If an investigator loses 5 or more Sanity points as the result of one Sanity roll, sufficient emotional trauma has been suf­fered that the Keeper must test the investigator’s sanity. The Keeper asks for an Intelligence (INT) roll. If the roll is failed, the investigator has 

repressed the memory (a trick the mind uses to protect itself), and does not become insane. Perversely, if the INT roll succeeds, the investigator recognizes the full significance of what has been seen or experienced and goes temporarily insane. The effects of temporary insanity begin immediately and last for 1D10 hours. 
Indefinite Insanity 
On losing a fifth or more of current Sanity points in one game “day”, the investigator becomes indefinitely insane. No investigator is simply able to shrug off this amount of san­ity drain. A “day” in this instance is defined by the Keeper, usually lasting until the investigator reaches a place of safety in which they can rest and recover their wits. Depending on the situation, it may mean surviving until dawn, sitting down for a nice cup of tea or having a good night’s sleep. In­definite insanity lasts until the character is cured or recovers (see Recovery from Indefinite Insanity, page @@). 
Permanent Insanity 
When Sanity points are reduced to zero the investigator is permanently and incurably insane and ceases to be a player character. In the real world, all insanity is indefinite insanity, since no one in real life can hope to predict the future as accurately as a Call of Cthulhu Keeper can. 
Many disorders, especially congenital conditions, offer little hope of recovery. Lovecraft concludes more than one story with the intimation that a lifetime of madness for the narrator will follow. 
Every Keeper must work out what the end-point of madness is in the game. Now and then a quiet release might be made from a local asylum. Some thin, unnaturally pallid person, almost unrecognizable after soul-wracking terrors, can walk shyly into downtown Arkham or elsewhere, cast keen eyes about, and attempt to regain some semblance of his or her former life—however, no player should count on such privilege as a right. 
The Effects of Insanity 
St John is a mangled corpse; I alone know why, and such is my knowledge that I am about to blow out my brains for fear I shall be mangled in the same way. Down unlit and illimit­able corridors of eldritch phantasy sweeps the black, shapeless Nemesis that drives me to self-annihilation. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Hound 

Both temporary and indefinite insanity take the investigator through two distinct phases of insanity. First, the investiga­tor experiences a short bout of madness (phase one). This is then followed by a longer period of underlying insanity (phase two), which lasts until the investigator has fully re­covered (hours in the case of temporary insanity, months in the case of indefinite insanity). 
Insanity Phase 1: A Bout of Madness 
Also known as “the red mist”, “frenzy”, “freak out”, “panic attack”. 
On becoming insane, the investigator experiences a bout of madness. While experiencing a bout of madness, the inves­tigator loses all self-control. In game terms this means that control of the investigator is handed from the player to the Keeper (for a short amount of real-world time). It is up to the Keeper whether this control takes the form of dictating specific actions or if it means giving the player guidelines on how to play out the madness for however long it may last. 
On the upside, the investigator cannot lose further San­ity points while experiencing a bout of madness. The mind is completely unhinged at this point and any subsequent horrors are either forgotten or later believed to be a man­ifestation of the madness. This protection is limited—the bout of madness lasts 1D10 combat rounds (‘real time’) if being played out, but may be longer, in which case the bout is summarized by the Keeper. 
Each time an investigator suffers a bout of madness, the Keeper may amend one of the investigator’s backstory en­tries or add a new one. These alterations serve two purposes. The first is to reflect the investigator’s descent in to madness by adding irrational entries or corrupting existing ones. Second, entries can be added or altered to reflect events in the story and thus tie the investigator in to the plot more strongly. The player and Keeper should work together to add or revise backstory entries appropriately. 
Personal Description: Suitable entries might include “Wild-eyed,” “Thousand-yard stare,”“World-weary,”or “No longer cares for their own appearance”. 
Coming to after a Bout of Madness should be disorienting. 

Ideology/Beliefs: A balanced entry such as “religious” might 

A Bout of Madness—Real Time 
be changed to something more extreme or deranged, such as “Unbelievers must be converted or made to suffer”. Alterna-If the bout of madness happens during a scene in which tively, a new entry that is appropriate to the situation might other investigators are present, the bout of madness lasts for be made, such as “Obsessed with defeating the Cthulhu cult”. 1D10 combat rounds (note that this is not the full duration 
of the state of insanity—which is 1D10 hours for temporary Significant People: A new name might be added together insanity or longer for indefinite insanity). with a reason for its inclusion. For example, “Can’t rest until The option to play out the bout of madness round-by-Delbert Smith is in his grave,” or “Robin Poole is the incar-round may be used even when the investigator is alone, or if nation of Ganesh.” the Keeper thinks it appropriate. To determine the nature of the bout of madness, either 
Meaningful Locations: The present location might take on roll on Table VII: Bouts of Madness—Real Time, or the great significance, or the investigator might become fixated Keeper may choose an appropriate option. 

on reaching another location for either rational or irrational reasons. The former might be the cult temple in the jungle; the latter might be an overpowering desire to visit Graceland. 

Treasured Possessions: It is easy to lose possessions while one’s mind is disrupted by insanity. Any possessions might be erased or noted as lost. A new Bouts of Madness— possession might be acquired and given great significance. Real Time (roll 1D10): 
Traits: A trait might be erased or al­

1) Amnesia: The investigator has no memory of events that have 
tered to something more suitable; for 

taken place since they were last in a place of safety. For example, it 
example: “bully,” “drug addict,” “easily 

seems to them that one moment they were eating breakfast and the 
distracted,” “talks too loud,” “lack of 

next they are facing a monster. This lasts for 1D10 rounds. 
inhibitions.” 

2) Psychosomatic disability: The investigator suffers psychosomatic Injuries & Scars: These are more usu-blindness, deafness, or loss of the use of a limb or limbs for 1D10 rounds. ally altered as a result of major wounds. 
3) Violence: A red mist descends on the investigator and they ex­plode in a spree of uncontrolled violence and destruction directed at 
Phobias and Manias: These may result 

their surroundings, allies or foes alike for 1D10 rounds. 
from rolls during the bout of madness. 

4) Paranoia: The investigator suffers severe paranoia for 1D10 rounds; Arcane Tomes, Spells and Artifacts: everyone is out to get them; no one can be trusted; they are being spied Such items might be lost or destroyed on; someone has betrayed them; what they are seeing is a trick. in a fit of pique. The investigator might 
5) Significant Person: Review the investigator’s backstory entry for 
involuntarily cast any spells that they 

Significant People. The investigator mistakes another person in the 
know, activate artifacts, or study a tome 

scene for their Significant Person. Consider the nature of the relation­
that they had previously shunned. 

ship; the investigator acts upon it. This lasts 1D10 rounds. 
Encounters with Strange Entities: 6) Faint: The investigator faints. They recover after 1D10 rounds. 
Encounters with a monster or deities 7) Flee in panic: The investigator is compelled to get as far away as should be recorded here regardless of possible by whatever means are available, even if it means taking the only whether insanity results or not. This vehicle and leaving everyone else behind. They travel for 1D10 rounds. also provides a good place to record the 
8) Physical hysterics or emotional outburst: The investigator is 
amount of Sanity points lost to a par­

incapacitated from laughing, crying, screaming, etc. for 1D10 rounds. 
ticular type of entity (see Getting used 

9) Phobia: Investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table IX: Sample 
to the awfulness, page @@). 

phobias, or the Keeper may choose one. Even if the source of the phobia is not present, the investigator imagines it is there for the next 1D10 rounds. 
A bout of madness can take one of 

10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table 
two forms depending on the situation, 

X: Sample manias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator 
either in real time (round-by-round) or 

seeks to indulge in their new mania for the next 1D10 rounds. 
in summary. 



Fleeing in panic furing a Bout of Madness. 

A Bout of Madness—Summary 
If the bout of madness happens away from the company of other investigators, or if all the investigators present suffer a bout of madness simultaneously, the Keeper can simply fast-forward the action and describe the outcome. The Keeper may describe the crazy things that the investigator has done, or simply say where the investigator finds him or herself when the bout of madness comes to an end. In this way the investigator may be lost in madness and thus not under the player’s control for minutes or hours (typically 1D10 hours, or as the Keeper judges appropriate). Note that these minutes or hours are not played out; they are simply summarized by the Keeper. The Keeper may just describe the unfamiliar place in which the investigator returns to their senses with no memory of where they have been or what they have done. 
Most of the outcomes require the investigator to leave the place where the onset of insanity occurs. If this is not possible the Keeper should adapt the outcome accordingly. If there is a chance that another investigator might hear or see the insane investigator leaving, they should be given a chance to intervene. If the insane investigator is confronted by another investigator before their bout of madness is over, the Keeper should hand control of the investigator back to the player at that moment and allow the players to roleplay the scene. This may mean that the intended outcome is cut short. 
To determine the nature of the bout of madness, either roll on Table VIII: Bouts of Madness—Summary or the Keeper may choose an appropriate option. 
Insanity Phase 2: Underlying Insanity 
Once the initial bout of madness is over, the investigator enters a lower-level state of underlying insanity. Control of the investigator is placed firmly in the hands of the player, who may freely choose how to roleplay being insane. While the player is not compelled to do so, aspects of the initial bout of madness might be reincorporated for the duration of the underlying insanity. 
While in the fragile state of underlying insanity (after the initial bout of madness has passed) any further loss of Sanity points (even a single point) will result in another bout of madness. This mental fragility remains for the full duration of the insanity—1D10 hours in the case of temporary insanity—and probably for the duration of the scenario or chapter of the campaign in the case of indefinite insanity. 
It is important to note that the investigator, whilst insane, may act completely rationally and normally, only outwardly presenting their insanity during bouts of madness. Further advice on roleplaying insane characters is provided in Chapter 10: Playing the Game (see Failed Sanity Rolls, page @@). 

Insanity Side-Effects 1: Phobias and Manias 
You ask me to explain why I am afraid of a draught of cool air —H.P. Lovecraft, Cool Air 
While the investigator is sane, a phobia or mania acts solely as a roleplaying trait. For ex­ample, if the player wishes for his or her (sane) investigator to overcome claustrophobia and crawl through dark tunnels, the phobia won’t prevent this. However, while the same investi­gator is insane, the phobia or mania takes on a greater significance. 
Phobic and Manic Responses While Insane 
Direct exposure (close physical proximity) to the subject of the phobia causes panic; equally, exposure to the source of a mania causes an obsessive reaction. 
For phobias, actions other than fighting or fleeing may only be made with one penalty die. This penalty does not apply to Sanity rolls or reality check rolls. 
While in a state of underlying insanity (see following), being exposed to the subject of their mania will cause an overwhelming response in the investigator. If the Keeper prompts the player towards some form of be­havior appropriate to their mania, the inves­tigator will suffer one penalty die on all dice rolls until the obsession has been indulged in some manner, or the investigator is well 


Table VIII : Bouts of Madness—Summary (roll 1D10): 
1) Amnesia: The investigator comes to their senses in some unfamil­iar place with no memory of who they are. Their memories will slowly return to them over time. 
2) Robbed: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having been robbed. They are unharmed. If they were carrying a Treasured Possession (see investigator backstory), make a Luck roll to see if it was stolen. Everything else of value is automatically missing. 
3) Battered: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later to find themselves battered and bruised. Hit points are reduced to half of what they were before going insane, though this does not cause a Major wound. They have not been robbed. How the damage was sustained is up to the Keeper. 
4) Violence: The investigator explodes in a spree of violence and destruction. When the investigator comes to their senses, their ac­tions may or may not be apparent or remembered. Who or what the investigator has inflicted violence upon and whether they have killed or simply inflicted harm is up to the Keeper. 
5) Ideology/Beliefs: Review the investigator’s backstory entry for Ideology and Beliefs. The investigator manifests one of these in an extreme, crazed and demonstrative manner. For example, a religious person might be found later, preaching the gospel loudly on the subway. 
6) Significant People: Consult the investigator’s backstory entry for Significant People and why the relationship is so important. In the time that passes (1D10 hours or more) the investigator has done their best to get close to that person and act upon their relationship in some way. 
7) Institutionalized: The investigator comes to their senses in a psychiatric ward or police cell. They may slowly recall the events that led them there. 
8) Flee in panic: When the investigator comes to their senses they are far away, perhaps lost in the wilderness or on a train or long-distance bus. 
9) Phobia: The investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table 
IX: Sample phobias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having taken every precaution to avoid their new phobia. 
10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table 
X: Sample Manias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later. During this bout of madness, the investigator will have been fully indulging in their new mania. Whether this is apparent to other people is up to the Keeper and player. 

Table IX: Sample Phobias 
A phobia is a lasting irrational fear of something. The Keeper may select randomly (roll 1D100) or choose an appropriate one. The Keeper should add the phobia to the investigator’s backstory. 
1) Ablutophobia: Fear of wash­ing or bathing.
2) Acrophobia: Fear of heights. 
3) Aerophobia: Fear of flying.
4) Agoraphobia: Fear of open, 
public (crowded) places.
5) Alektorophobia: Fear of 
chickens. 
6) Alliumphobia: Fear of garlic 
7) Amaxophobia: Fear of being 
in or riding in vehicles.
8) Ancraophobia: Fear of wind. 
9) Androphobia: Fear of men. 
10) Anglophobia: Fear of England or English culture, etc.
11) Anthrophobia: Fear of 
flowers. 
12) Apotemnophobia: Fear of people with amputations.
13) Arachnophobia: Fear 
spiders.
14) Astraphobia: Fear of light­
ning.
15) Atephobia: Fear of ruin or ruins. 
16) Aulophobia: Fear of flutes. 
17) Bacteriophobia: Fear of 
bacteria. 
18) Ballistophobia: Fear of 
missiles or bullets. 
19) Basophobia: Fear of falling.
20) Bibliophobia: Fear of books. 
21) Botanophobia: Fear of 
plants.
22) Caligynephobia: Fear of 
beautiful women. 
23) Cheimaphobia: Fear of cold. 
24) Chronomentrophobia: Fear of clocks. 
25) Claustrophobia: Fear of 
confined spaces.
26) Coulrophobia: Fear of 
clowns. 
27) Cynophobia: Fear of dogs.
28) Demonophobia: Fear of 
spirits or demons.
29) Demophobia: Fear of 
crowds. 
30) Dentophobia: Fear of 
dentists. 
31) Disposophobia: Fear of throwing stuff out (hoarding).
32) Doraphobia: Fear of fur. 
33) Dromophobia: Fear of crossing streets.
34) Ecclesiophobia: Fear of 
church. 
35) Eisoptrophobia: Fear of mirrors. 
36) Enetophobia: Fear of nee­
dles or pins. 
37) Entomophobia: Fear of insects. 
38) Felinophobia: Fear of cats. 
39) Gephyrophobia: Fear of crossing bridges.
40) Gerontophobia: Fear of old 
people or of growing old.

41) Gynophobia: Fear of wom­en. 
42) Haemaphobia: Fear of 
blood. 

43) Hamartophobia: Fear of 
sinning.

44) Haphophobia: Fear of touch. 
45) Herpetophobia: Fear of 
reptiles.

46) Homichlophobia: Fear of fog.
47) Hoplophobia: Fear of 
firearms. 

48) Hydrophobia: Fear of water. 
49) Hypnophobia: Fear of sleep 
or of being hypnotized.

50) Iatrophobia: Fear of doctors. 
51) Ichthyophobia: Fear of fish. 
52) Katsaridaphobia: Fear of 
cockroaches. 

53) Keraunophobia: Fear of thunder. 
54) Lachanophobia: Fear of 
vegetables.

55) Ligyrophobia: Fear of loud 
noises. 

56) Limnophobia: Fear of lakes. 
57) Mechanophobia: Fear of 
machines or machinery.

58) Megalophobia: Fear of large 
things.

59) Merinthophobia: Fear of 
being bound or tied up.

60) Meteorophobia: Fear of meteors or meteorites. 
61) Monophobia: Fear of being 
alone. 

62) Mysophobia: Fear of dirt or 
contamination. 

63) Myxophobia: Fear of slime. 
64) Necrophobia: Fear of dead things.
65) Octophobia: Fear of the 
figure 8.

66) Odontophobia: Fear of 
teeth. 

67) Oneirophobia: Fear of dreams. 
68) Onomatophobia: Fear of 
hearing a certain word or words.
69) Ophidiophobia: Fear of snakes. 
70) Ornithophobia: Fear of 
birds. 
71) Parasitophobia: Fear of 
parasites. 
72) Pediophobia: Fear of dolls. 
73) Phagophobia: Fear of 
swallowing, of eating or of being 
eaten. 
74) Pharmacophobia: Fear of drugs.
75) Phasmophobia: Fear of 
ghosts.
76) Phenogophobia: Fear of 
daylight.
77) Pogonophobia: Fear of beards. 
78) Potamophobia: Fear of 
rivers. 
79) Potophobia: Fear of alcohol or alcoholic beverages.
80) Pyrophobia: Fear of fire. 
81) Rhabdophobia: Fear of magic.
82) Scotophobia: Fear of dark­
ness or of the night.
83) Selenophobia: Fear of the 
moon. 
84) Siderodromophobia: Fear of 
train travel. 
85) Siderophobia: Fear of stars. 
86) Stenophobia: Fear of narrow 
things or places.
87) Symmetrophobia: Fear of 
symmetry.
88) Taphephobia: Fear of being buried alive or of cemeteries. 
89) Taurophobia: Fear of bulls. 
90) Telephonophobia: Fear of 
telephones.
91) Teratophobia: Fear of 
monsters. 
92) Thalassophobia: Fear of the sea. 
93) Tomophobia: Fear of surgi­
cal operations.
94) Triskadekaphobia: Fear of 
the number 13. 
95) Vestiphobia: Fear of cloth­
ing.
96) Wiccaphobia: Fear of 
witches and witchcraft. 
97) Xanthophobia: Fear of the color yellow or the word 
“yellow”.
98) Xenoglossophobia: Fear of 
foreign languages.
99) Xenophobia: Fear of strang­
ers or foreigners.
100) Zoophobia: Fear of animals. 


A mania results in an obsession or compulsion with its subject. The Keeper may select randomly (roll 1D100) or choose an 
appropriate one. The Keeper should add the mania to the investigator’s backstory. 
1) Ablutomania: compulsion for washing oneself. 
2) Aboulomania: pathological indecisive­ness. 
3) Achluomania: an excessive liking for darkness. 
4) Acromaniaheights: compulsion for high places. 
5) Agathomania: pathological kindness. 
6) Agromania: intense desire to be in open spaces. 
7) Aichmomania: obsession with sharp or pointed objects. 
8) Ailuromania: abnormal fondness for cats. 
9) Algomania: obsession with pain. 
10) Alliomania: obsession with garlic. 
11) Amaxomania: obsession with being in vehicles. 
12) Amenomania: irrational cheerfulness. 
13) Anthomania: obsession with flowers. 
14) Arithmomania: obsessive preoccupa­tion with numbers. 
15) Asoticamania: impulsive or reckless spending. 
16) Automania: an excessive liking for solitude. 
17) Balletomania: abnormal fondness for ballet. 
18) Bibliokleptomania: compulsion for stealing books. 
19) Bibliomania: obsession with books and/or reading. 
20) Bruxomania: compulsion for grinding teeth. 
21) Cacodemomania: pathological belief that one is inhabited by an evil spirit. 
22) Callomania: obsession with one’s own beauty. 
23) Cartacoethes: uncontrollable compul­sion to see maps everywhere. 
24) Catapedamania: Obsession with jumping from high places. 
25) Cheimatomania: abnormal desire for cold and/or cold things. 
26) Choreomania: dancing mania or uncontrollable frenzy. 
27) Clinomania: excessive desire to stay in bed. 
28) Coimetromania: obsession with cemeteries. 
29) Coloromania: obsession with a specific color. 
30) Coulromania: obsession with clowns. 
31) Countermania: compulsion to experience fearful situations. 
32) Dacnomania: obsession with killing. 
33) Demonomania: pathological belief that one is possessed by demons. 
34) Dermatillomania: compulsion for picking at one’s skin. 
35) Dikemania: obsession to see justice done. 

36) Dipsomania: abnormal craving for alcohol. 
37) Doramania: obsession with owning furs. 
38) Doromania: obsession with giving gifts. 
39) Drapetomania: compulsion for running away. 
40) Ecdemiomania: compulsion for wandering. 
41) Egomania: irrational self-centered attitude or self-worship. 
42) Empleomania: Insatiable urge to hold office. 
43) Enosimania: pathological belief that one has sinned. 
44) Epistemomania: obsession for acquiring knowledge. 
45) Eremiomania: compulsion for stillness. 
46) Etheromania: craving for ether. 
47) Gamomania: obsession with issuing odd marriage proposals. 
48) Geliomania: uncontrollable compul­sion to laugh. 
49) Goetomania: obsession with witches and witchcraft. 
50) Graphomania: obsession with writing everything down. 
51) Gymnomania: compulsion with nudity. 
52) Habromania: abnormal tendency to create pleasant delusions (in spite of reality). 
53) Helminthomania: an excessive liking for worms. 
54) Hoplomania: obsession with firearms. 
55) Hydromania: irrational craving for water. 
56) Ichthyomania: obsession with fish. 
57) Iconomania: obsession with icons or portraits. 
58) Idolomania: obsession or devotion to an idol. 
59) Infomania: excessive devotion to accumulating facts. 
60) Klazomania: irrational compulsion to shout. 
61) Kleptomania: irrational compulsion for stealing. 
62) Ligyromania: uncontrollable compul­sion to make loud or shrill noises. 
63) Linonomania: obsession with string. 
64) Lotterymania: an extreme desire to take part in lotteries. 
65) Lypemania: an abnormal tendency toward deep melancholy. 
66) Megalithomania: abnormal tendency to compose bizarre ideas when in the presence of stone circles/standing stones. 
67) Melomania: obsession with music or a specific tune. 
68) Metromania: insatiable desire for writing verse. 
69) Misomania: hatred of everything, obsession of hating some subject or group. 
70) Monomania: abnormal obsession with a single thought or idea. 
71) Mythomania: lying or exaggerating to an abnormal extent. 
72) Nosomania: delusion of suffering from an imagined disease. 
73) Notomania: compulsion to record everything (e.g. photograph). 
74) Onomamania: obsession with names (people, places, things). 
75) Onomatomania: irresistible desire to repeat certain words. 
76) Onychotillomania: compulsive picking at the fingernails. 
77) Opsomania: abnormal love for one kind of food. 
78) Paramania: an abnormal pleasure in complaining. 
79) Personamania: compulsion to wear masks. 
80) Phasmomania: obsession with ghosts. 
81) Phonomania: pathological tendency to murder. 
82) Photomania: pathological desire for light. 
83) Planomania: abnormal desire to disobey social norms. 
84) Plutomania: obsessive desire for wealth. 
85) Pseudomania: irrational compulsion for lying. 
86) Pyromania: compulsion for starting fires. 
87) Question-Asking Mania: compulsive urge to ask questions. 
88) Rhinotillexomania: compulsive nose picking. 
89) Scribbleomania: obsession with scribbling/doodling. 
90) Siderodromomania: intense fascina­tion with trains and railroad travel. 
91) Sophomania: the delusion that one is incredibly intelligent. 
92) Technomania: obsession with new technology. 
93) Thanatomania: belief that one is cursed by death magic. 
94) Theomania: belief that he or she is a god. 
95) Titillomaniac: compulsion for scratching oneself. 
96) Tomomania: irrational predilection for performing surgery. 
97) Trichotillomania: craving for pulling out own hair. 
98) Typhlomania: pathological blindness. 
99) Xenomania: obsession with foreign things. 
100) Zoomania: insane fondness for animals. 


out of range of the stimulus. For example, while in a place that serves alcohol, a dipsomaniac would take one penalty die on all rolls unless taking a drink. Of course characters who fully succumb to their drug craving will be subject to the drug’s effects, such as drunkenness or altered states of consciousness. In such situations the Keeper may alter the level of difficulty of certain skill rolls (or impose a penalty die on opposed skill rolls) depending on the situation and state of the character. 
Successful use of the Psychoanalysis skill upon an insane investigator enables the insane investigator to temporarily ignore a phobia or mania (see Chapter 4: Skills). 

Insanity Side-Effects 2: Delusions and Reality Checks 
Where does madness leave off and reality begin? Is it possible that even my latest fear is sheer delusion? —H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Over Innsmouth 
While not in control of the investigator’s actions, the Keeper is free to present an investigator suffering underlying insan­ity with delusional sensory information at any time. The only way for the player to be sure of what his or her insane investigator is seeing, hearing, touching, feeling or smelling is to make a “Reality Check”. 
Delusions have greater impact when they have some relevance to the investigator. A great way to do this is to refer to the investigator’s backstory and use some aspect as inspi­ration for delusions. An investigator’s late spouse calling on the telephone is much more engaging than random delu­sions. Delusions can also make great consequences when a player of an investigator suffering underlying insanity fails a Pushed skill roll. 
Reality Check Rolls 
While reality checks are only usually called for on behalf of insane investigators, a player might call for one if they wish to “see through” what they believe to be a hallucination or illusion. To perform a reality check, the player makes a Sanity roll: 
A threat of the Mythos or just a nice old lady? 
Failure: lose 1 Sanity point. This will immediately induce a bout of madness if the investigator is suffering underlying insanity. Any delusions are not dispelled. 
Success: the investigator sees through any delusions, and the Keeper must describe what the investigator genuinely perceives. 
On making a successful reality check roll, the investiga­tor should see things as they really are and will be resistant to delusions until losing further Sanity points (thus pre­venting the Keeper from constantly throwing delusions at a player). 
Successful use of the Psychoanalysis skill will allow an insane investigator to see a delusion for what it is. 

 Phobia 

When exposed to the source of their phobia, or even just thinking about it, a character’s symptoms can develop rap­idly. Within seconds, palpitations, trembling, choking and an uncontrollable anxiety appear. The character feels that they must do everything possible to avoid the situation. 
Mania 

A character with a mania will have a fairly constant euphor­ic or possibly irritable mood. Symptoms include a general increase in activity, garrulousness, increased self-esteem to the point of delusion, decreased need for sleep, easily distracted, willingness for dangerous or imprudent activi­ties such as reckless driving, hallucinations, delusions, and bizarre behavior. 
Compulsion 

Compulsions tend to be ritual actions performed to affect the future, possibly to prevent some vague notion of im­pending doom. Though the character may agree the actions are senseless, the need to perform them is overpowering. Even in times of great stress, the character may ignore his or her survival in order to perform the ritual. 
Amnesia 

An inability to recall important personal information, brought on by a desire to avoid unpleasant memories. The character may just forget the bad experience that caused the amnesia or they could forget major chunks of time, or even everything about themselves. The Keeper may choose to reset Cthulhu Mythos to 0 and maximum Sanity to 99 while the amnesia holds sway; the horror returns when the character’s memories do, or when they experience a similarly horrific situation. 
Insanity Side-Effects 3: Insanity and the Cthulhu Mythos 
What I have seen cannot be true, and I know that this mad­ness of my own will at most lead only to suffocation when my air is gone. The light in the temple is a sheer delusion, and I shall die calmly like a German, in the black and forgotten depths. This demoniac laughter which I hear as I write comes only from my own weakening brain. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Temple 

Insanity bought on by non-Mythos stimuli yields no Cthul­hu Mythos knowledge. However, each time an investigator reels from Mythos-induced trauma (e.g. seeing a Mythos monster, reading a Mythos tome, or affected by a Mythos spell), he or she learns more of the Mythos, and this is reflected in the Cthulhu Mythos skill. The first instance of Mythos-related insanity always adds 5 points to the Cthulhu Mythos skill. Further episodes of Mythos-induced insanity (temporary or indefinite) each add 1 point to the skill. 

A note about delusions and Sanity point loss 
The delusion of a sanity-threatening entity (e.g. a monster) may cause an investigator the same potential Sanity point loss as the real thing. The player has a choice: either accept what is seen as “real” and make the appropriate Sanity roll for seeing that monster, or make a reality check roll. If the player makes a success­ful reality check roll and dispels the delusion, no Sanity roll needs to be made—there was no monster after all, perhaps just a tramp who appeared to be a monster in the eyes of the insane investigator. However, if the player fails the reality check roll, the insane investigator loses one Sanity point and enters a bout of madness. 
Note that while suffering a bout of madness the investigator is immune to further Sanity point loss and need not make a Sanity roll for seeing the monster. If the monster (delusion or not) is still present at the end of the bout of madness, the player will then have to make the appropriate Sanity roll for seeing the monster. 

Treatment and         Recovery from Insanity 
Temporary insanity ends quickly enough that schedules of treatment are not realistic. On the other hand, treatment of permanent insanity mostly has no meaning, since by definition the character will never recover, no matter how good the facility (the character should be retired from play). Only indefinite insanity offers real scope for intervention and treatment. 
Recovery from Temporary Insanity 
Temporary insanity lasts 1D10 hours. Alternatively, the investigator will recover after a good night’s sleep in a safe place. If the investigators are in a state of heightened ten­sion (for example, standing watch at night due to fear of imminent attack), the Keeper may deem that sanity cannot be recovered. 
Recovery from Indefinite Insanity 
After each month of treatment of an indefinitely insane character, safe from further trauma, the player makes a dice roll. Two sorts of care might help to get the character to this point: private care or institutionalization. In choosing, the Keeper and player should consider the character’s resources, friends and relatives, and past behavior. 
Alternatively, at the Keeper’s discretion, indefinite in­sanity lasts until the next Investigator Development Phase at the end of the present game chapter (in a campaign) or scenario. 
Private Care 
The best care available is at home or in some friendly place where nursing can be tender, considerate, and where there are no distractions (such as other patients). Analysis and/or psychiatric medications may be available. 
To determine the success of treatment with private/ home care, roll 1D100: 
A result of 01–95 is a success: add 1D3 Sanity points for psychiatric medications or psychoanalysis. This is followed by a Sanity roll for the investigator; if the roll is successful, the investigator is cured of their insanity; if the roll is unsuc­cessful then a further Sanity roll may be attempted in one month’s time. 
If the result is 96–100: the character rebels against taking the drugs or therapy. 1D6 Sanity points are lost and no further progress can be made during the next game month. 

Institutionalization 
The next best care is committal to an insane asylum. Asy­lums may be said to have an advantage over home care in that they are relatively cheap, or even a free service pro­vided by the state. These institutions are of uneven quality and some may be potentially harmful. Some are creative places of experiment and advanced therapy, while others merely offer rude confinement. 
Supervised activity, manual therapy, psychiatric med­ications and hydrotherapy are frequent, as is electrocon­vulsive treatment (dependent on the period within which your game is set). 
Psychoanalysis is unlikely to be available. Sometimes an institution may convey an uncaring sense that undermines the useful effects of psychiatric medications, leaving the investigator with a sense of anger and loss, and likely to be distrustful of outpatient support once he or she has left the institution. 
To determine the success of treatment within an institu­tion, roll 1D100: 
A result of 01–50* is a success: add 1D3 Sanity points for psychiatric medications and/or therapy. This is followed by a Sanity roll, if the Sanity roll is successful, the investigator is cured of their insanity; if the roll is unsuccessful then a further Sanity roll may be attempted in one month’s time. 
If the result is 51–95: no progress has been made. 
If the result is 96–100: the character rebels against taking the drugs or therapy. 1D6 Sanity points are lost, and no progress can be made during the next game month. 


Sanity Loss 
The following is a guide for how the loss of San­ity points might be characterized and can be used to complement and add color to the other rules described in this chapter (note that the effects may accumulate). 1—2 points: discomfort and unease, something gnawing at the corner of the mind—hardly noticeable, yet definitely there. 3—4 points: disgust, or the feeling that something is wrong here. This may manifest in vomiting, momen­tary stupefaction, or shivering. 5—9 points: fear, panic, or disorientation—enough to cause a potential episode of temporary insanity. This represents a major shock leading to uncontrollable physical reactions (violent body ticks, extreme nausea, etc.) and/or disassociation with surroundings and people. 10—19 points: mind-warping horror—hair changes to white, violent physical reaction (to self and/or oth­ers), physical and mental shutdown, sudden character change (temporary), raving and delusions, or propen­sity to either violence or total fear. 20+ points: ultimate cosmic evil—beyond humanity’s ability to comprehend. The mind is broken and will take a long time to return to sanity, and even if a way can be found, the person will never be the same again. 


*50 is an average rating. The Keeper may determine that the standard of an institution is above or below average, and so raise or lower this value within the range of 5 to 95. 
Commitment to an Asylum 
Investigators may want to stay at an asylum or sanitarium, perhaps to gather information, hide from someone, or even to receive treatment. They should have little trouble enter­ing if they can pay for the care. A private institution with an available room will accept someone without symptoms who merely wishes a rest and counseling. All institutions ask for references, however. 
A medical practitioner licensed within the state can arrange that an investigator be held for psychiatric obser­vation for up to 72 hours. If evidence of serious disorder is gathered, the patient may be placed in an asylum for a lon­ger period, for purposes of observation and evaluation as spelled out by law. Then the court will discharge or commit for treatment depending on the asylum’s report. 
Those committed for treatment are subject to review, but they may be in an institution for many years. It requires another formal presentation to the court, in which an inves­tigator would have to be found mentally incompetent to act on his or her own behalf, or else might voluntarily surrender specific legal rights in return for treatment. The soundness of these proceedings can vary widely; brusque pro forma evaluations are not unusual, and much depends upon the character and dedication of judge, counsel, and examining physician or physicians. 


If the court decides for mental incompetence, then a responsible guardian is chosen, who thereafter in theory acts to benefit the individual. Normally the guardian is a relative or someone whom the court has reason to assume will act in the individual’s best regard. Lacking other candidates, the court appoints itself. 
Unless the investigator is criminally insane (in which case the court must be the guardian), the guardian now decides what is best for the investigator. This may indeed be commitment, but it might also be home care, or a therapeu­tic sea voyage, etc. Lacking other indication, the court will accept any reasonable plan that seems to have the backing of medical opinion. 
If the guardian commits the investigator to an institu­tion, the guardian continues to have general authority over the investigator, assigning day-to-day care and authority with the sanitarium staff. Thereafter, the investigator has three ways to leave: he or she may convince the guardian to remove him or her from the institution; he or she may convince the institution’s staff to bring notice of his or her restored mental balance before the awarding court and that court takes upon itself the guardianship and grants his or her freedom; or he or she can simply climb over the institu­tion’s wall and run for his or her life. 
Mental Health Dangerousness Criteria 
When a person seems to be at risk of self-harm or for harm to others, and apparently cannot care for him or herself, a medical doctor can certify that the individual should un­dergo psychiatric assessment and/or become an involuntary patient. With this affirmation, often of a comprehensive nature, the state can hold an individual for observation and potentially for treatment. The duration of institutionaliza­tion varies by state, but the term is rarely less than 60 game days for a legal assessment, and frequently up to 180 days. 
This fate is most likely for an investigator who attempts bodily assault or murder without apparent motive, or who intelligently shams mental disturbance to avoid serious criminal charges. The doctor also can revoke the capacity to manage personal finances, the right to drive an automobile, the right to make treatment decisions, and so on. 
Dr. Shiny 


Increasing Current Sanity Points 
In addition to the care listed above, there are four ways to raise an investigator’s current Sanity points. 
1.
 Keeper award: at the end of a successful scenario or campaign chapter, Keepers may specify dice rolls to increase investigators’ current Sanity points. Keeper award rolls are the same for all participants, but are rolled individually by players. Such rewards should be proportional to the danger the group faced. However, if the investigators were cowardly, brutal or murderous, the Keeper may opt to reduce or remove the reward, especially if they wish to enforce a moral agenda. 

2.
Increasing a Skill to 90%: award 2D6 Sanity points when a character increases a skill to 90%. This reward represents the discipline and self-esteem gained in mastering a skill. 

3.
 Psychotherapy: intensive psychoanalysis can return Sanity points to an investigator patient. Make a 1D100 roll against the analyst or doctor’s Psychoanalysis skill once per month. If the roll succeeds, the patient gains 1D3 Sanity points. If the roll fails, add no points. If the roll is fumbled 




then the patient loses 1D6 Sanity points, and treatment by that analyst concludes—there has been some sort of serious incident or dramatic setback in the therapy, and the relationship between patient and therapist has broken down beyond saving. 
In the game, psychoanalysis alone does not speed recov­ery from insanity; however, it can strengthen the investiga­tor by increasing Sanity points, providing a larger reserve for the active days to come. Recovery is independent of Sanity points. The use of psychoanalysis is different in the game world than in the real world. In the real world, psychoanal­ysis will not work against the symptoms of schizophrenia, psychotic disorders, bipolar disorders (manic depression) or severe depression. Psychoanalysis is the game’s equiva­lent of mental first aid and is a world removed from real-life medical care for mental illness. 
While in game terms, temporary and indefinite insanity can be cured, permanent insanity is impervious to psycho­analysis. Participation is impossible when the investigator’s mind is in such disarray. 
Therapy can also be used to remove a phobias or mania. At the end of a month the analyst rolls for success in the same manner as detailed above. If successful, the investiga­tor then makes a Sanity roll. If both rolls are successful the phobia or mania is cured and erased from the investigator’s backstory. This benefit replaces the Sanity point gain and no such points are awarded. Failure of either of the rolls bestows no benefit. Fumbling either of the rolls results in a loss of 1D6 Sanity points (as above). 
Seeing the shriveled body of a friend is likely to call for a Sanity roll. 
4.Self-help: an investigator may choose to spend time with one thing listed in their backstory which could act as a form of psychological support; clearly this does not include phobias, manias, wounds or anything to do with the Cthul­hu Mythos. This may be done during downtime between adventures or during the investigator development phase. 
The player should go in to some detail about what their investigator is doing to seek healing or redemption. The ac­tions should be thematically appropriate to their backstory; perhaps the investigator is going on a religious retreat or a holiday with a loved one. 
The player then makes a Sanity roll. Keeper and players are encouraged to roleplay the scene to the point where it comes to a head, and then make the Sanity roll, roleplaying the outcome. If the roll is successful, the investigator gains 1D6 Sanity points. If it is unsuccessful, 1 Sanity point is lost, and the Keeper and player should revise that aspect of the investigator’s backstory in some way to reflect the failure. Thus the religious retreat might result in a complete loss of religious faith, or a family holiday might result in separation or divorce. 
Each investigator begins the game with one backstory entry that is especially important to them: this is their “key connection”. If the player chooses to use their investigator’s key connection, they are granted a bonus die when making their Sanity roll. In addition to the 1D6 Sanity points gained for a successful Sanity roll, the investigator will recover from any indefinite insanity. If the Sanity roll is failed, that aspect of the investigator’s backstory is revised, and that investiga­tor no longer has a key connection. 
In time, the investigator may form a new key connection. During a future investigator development phase, a backsto­ry aspect may be converted into a new key connection if the player successfully uses the “self-help” option to regain San­ity points via that connection. Alternatively, any Sanity roll of 01 (critical success) allows for the immediate nomination of a new key connection to replace the one that was lost. 
Note: Current Sanity points can never increase above an investigator’s maximum Sanity (99–Cthulhu Mythos skill). 
Getting Used to the Awfulness 
At some point, constant exposure to the same Mythos crea­ture has no further effect—the monster is no longer a living nightmare, but rather another obstacle in the investigator’s path. Once an investigator has lost as many Sanity points for seeing a particular sort of monster as the maximum possible Sanity point loss for that monster, he or she should not lose more Sanity points for a reasonable interval. For instance, no investigator could lose more than 6 Sanity points for encountering deep ones (0/1D6 SAN), even if a hundred of them were seen at once. 
But be warned! Investigators never truly get used to seeing alien obscenities. After a time, perhaps once the investigator’s life has returned to some form of normalcy, the sense of horror can rise up anew. A player should keep track of the Sanity points lost to any given Mythos entity. With every investigator development phase (see page @@), the player should reduce all those numbers by 1—time is a great healer. 




Optional Rules 
Insane Insight 
When an investigator goes insane (either temporarily or indefinitely), he or she has a momentary insane insight. This moment of clarity provides a clue or action that might benefit the investigator(s) immediately or at some later stage. The Keeper should determine an appropriate insight relevant to the plot of the scenario. 
Mythos Hardened 
When an investigator’s Cthulhu Mythos skill rises above the value of his or her Sanity score a turning point has been reached. That investigator’s understanding of the universe undergoes a paradigm shift that results in a permanent change to their personality and comprehension of their place in the cosmos. How this is portrayed is left open to the player. The player may decide that his or her investigator’s mind is inured to the horror, no longer cares, or has a more profound understanding that is no longer shaken by the truth. From that point onward, all Sanity point loss is halved. Once this change has taken place it is permanent and will not revert if the investigator’s Sanity should rise above their Cthulhu Mythos knowledge. 

Multiple Sanity rolls 
The rules state that the Sanity point loss for a monster remains the same whether one monster or a multiple monsters are en­countered. One option that ramps up Sanity point loss is to ask the player to roll Sanity loss once for each monster and then use the highest number rolled. This approach works well when mul­tiple monsters of different types are encountered simultaneously. 



Do you know that Einstein is wrong, and that certain objects and forces can move with a velocity greater than that of light? With proper aid I expect to go backward and forward in time, and actually see and feel the earth of remote past and future epochs. You can't imagine the degree to which those beings have carried science. There is nothing they can't do with the mind and body of living organisms. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Whisperer In Darkness 


he magic of the Cthulhu Mythos stems from the unfathomable alien intelligences that reside outside of humanity’s ability to comprehend. What may be the pinnacle of science can eas­ily be interpreted as “magic” by the ignorant. 

What is certain is that those who delve into such matters rarely come away unchanged—usually for the worse! Ma­nipulating time and space is not a thing to be done lightly and there can be grave consequences for those investigators who dabble in things best left alone. 
Mythos magic is variable and was not tightly defined by H.P. Lovecraft; each occurrence of magic serves a par­ticular story rather than fitting some consistent overarching structure. However, some generalizations can be made. Mythos magic is traditional in scope, centering on perilous summoning of horrible entities and the desperate manip­ulation of inimical forces. Spells are formally constructed; one wrong word or gesture can disrupt the spell at best, or cause it to go horribly wrong at worst. 
Few Mythos spells can be performed quickly, with many requiring exacting conditions as well as lengthy rites and ceremonies. Each spell must be studied and learnt, often requiring the investigator to spend long hours poring over cryptic manuscripts and ancient books of lore. Though rare for investigators, cultists and sorcerers may be taught spells by their fellows, or even granted magical visions, knowl­edge, and spells through abhorrent communion with the dark gods of the Cthulhu Mythos. Investigators wishing to find a fast track for learning spells are more likely to find a one-way ticket to an asylum, their minds broken and sanity destroyed. 
Spells must be approached warily, since often their costs and effects are initially unknown to the spell-caster. For investigators, Mythos magic can be a dangerous trap, for in using it investigators lose Sanity points and gain Cthulhu Mythos knowledge—becoming more like those whom they seek to defeat. Mythos magic bewilders, shocks, disorients, and debilitates its human practitioners. Mankind was not meant to know such things and with enough exposure, the psychic and physical contradictions involved in using magic drive humans insane. 
Investigators will mostly experience magic from outside sources, either by being the target or by witnessing the effect of spells cast by someone else. An investigator rarely be­comes a mage, since the requisite knowledge and experience usually leads to madness first. 
Whether investigators gain much by knowing the magic of the Cthulhu Mythos, they often risk much when attempting to use it. Spells learned while playing published scenarios may prove useful only in the course of a single adventure. Consequently, though all players are invited to study this chapter, it is only Keepers who will benefit most from it when planning adventures and creating suitably objectionable adversaries. 
In This Chapter 
This chapter discusses spells and the books of the Cthulhu Mythos—how spells are learnt and how they are cast, as well as looking at the dark knowledge contained within ancient tomes. It also discusses the occult versus the magical, and tells ways to increase the POW characteristic. 
This chapter does not contain spells. Mythos spells can be found in Chapter 12: Grimoire. 
What is Magic? 
Gilman had some terrible hints from the dreaded Necronomicon of Abdul Al-hazred…and the suppressed Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt to correlate with his abstract formulae on the properties of space and the linkage of dimensions known and unknown.
 —H.P. Lovecraft, The Dreams in the Witch House 

After World War I, astronomers confirmed that the thirty or forty thousand light years of easily observed stars nearest to us comprised only a minor corner of the universe. There was not one Milky Way, as astronomers had once believed, but rather thousands and millions of galaxies, most so faint and so distant that the truth of the nebulae had long been argued, but never before solved. The notion of island uni­verses—galaxies, as we now say—was a bombshell. In the 1920s, humanity’s perception of the unbounded universe’s true size increased by orders of magnitude. 
Writing as such discoveries took place, Lovecraft gradu­ally evolved a background myth incorporating such discov­eries and added some flavorings from Einstein and Planck. These new “universes,” so he appears to have speculated, were truly islands—their separation included their natural laws. Isolated by hundreds of thousands or millions of light years, the stuff of life could differ wildly. Very quickly, these islands also took on a Riemannian association of existing in or being connected to other dimensions. 
The magic of the Cthulhu Mythos is the unifying logic of this universe of universes. Magic works everywhere. It models and defines the greater reality; it is the ultimate expression of natural law, the will of the Outer Gods made palpable and the arbiter of time, space, and matter. 
In comparison, earthly science and religion seem of little avail. Apparently we understand far less than we flatter ourselves as knowing. Is imperfection in what we believe or in how we have come to believe it? Perhaps there is a poverty in our souls or our mathematical equations that forestalls ultimate knowledge and revelation. The Mythos mocks human pretensions. 

Mythos Tomes 
The open book lay flat between us, with the picture staring re­pulsively upward. As the old man whispered the words "more the same" a tiny splattering impact was heard, and something showed on the yellowed paper of the upturned volume. I thought of the rain and of a leaky roof, but rain is not red. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Picture In The House 
In Lovecraft’s stories, the protagonist usually learns Mythos magic by finding and following written instructions. The volumes of arcane lore mentioned by the Lovecraft Circle of writers represent the intellectual invasion of the Cthul­hu Mythos. In particular, these ancient manuscripts and suppressed publications included recipes for the admission (or return!) of the Great Old Ones and the Outer Gods, as described in vivid detail in Lovecraft’s classic story The Dunwich Horror. At least by implication, such writings also indicated how to force away or dispel those dreadful entities. 
It takes time to learn, even from textbooks that have been carefully written and specially laid out just for that purpose. Studying the crabbed, idiosyncratic, and infinitely more dif­ficult Mythos books takes much more time and dedication. These musty, thick books are often clumsily scribed by men whose sanity has long since been erased by the horror of their experiments, trials, and conjectures. The present day apparatus of scholarship does not exist in such books. There are no indices, no glossaries, no tables of contents, and no careful definitions. There may not be numbered pages, chapters, paragraphs, punctuation or even breaks between words. Some tomes might best be described as the ravings of mad men—yet to the seeker of dark knowledge, such texts hold wondrous insights and power. 
Many manuscripts are not even in a known alphabet— some are older than time, in languages long lost; others are written in occult ciphers to stymie witch-finders or the Inquisition, and now must be cracked before the would-be reader can ponder the sinister truths they conceal. 
Even if a sorcerer wrote for others who were familiar with the arcane and occult, the writing was for adepts and cultists, not laypersons. Strange terms and ideas would be written with no explanation. Valuable annotations might be made by a succession of owners, each perhaps in a different language or with a different aim, and some inscribed in error. 
Many Mythos tomes are ancient and must be handled with care. Some are delicate and liable to crumble to dust if the reader doesn’t wear thin gloves and turn the pages with padded forceps. Some whisper that certain tomes are more than merely pages bound in leather; that they are "living" things, intent on sowing their evil taint on the unwary and acting as direct conduits to the horrors of the Outer Gods. 
Only in the present does the technology exist with which to make quick and accurate copies. 
An aspiring occult student attempts to cast a spell. 

Reading Mythos Books 
Opening a Mythos tome is a dangerous business. It was written by someone who had experienced the Mythos and, if the reader is successful in understanding what is written, this book will act as a conduit to the alien horrors of the Cthulhu Mythos. Opening the cover of a tome might be lik­ened to opening a door to a burning room. By opening this door the reader is exposed to the fire and may be scorched or incinerated. The human mind is metaphorically burnt by the knowledge of the Mythos, the very act of trying to comprehend the material causing the reader to suffer both mentally and physically. Some of the lesser tomes might only be a small fire, but others, such as the dread Necronomicon, are a raging inferno. 
When an investigator gains access to a Mythos tome, the Keeper should describe the cover and look of the book. The reader can swiftly ascertain whether the tome is written in a language he or she understands. Refer to Language (other) skill (page @@) for rules on recognizing and reading other languages. A translator must be found if a book is written in a language unknown by the investigator. The Keeper should decide what gets translated, how quickly, and how accurately. If the language is unknown or long forgotten, the investigators must come up with a plan that convinces the Keeper, or else the book baffles them. 
Initial Reading 
The next step, beyond looking at the cover, reading the title (if it has one that can be read) and determining the language in which the book is written, is to make an initial reading. To continue the analogy used above, this is where the investi­gator is exposed to the fire within. An initial reading can be swift and may represent the reader only having skimmed the book sufficient to gain some insight regarding its contents, or it may be a cover-to-cover reading. An initial reading can take as much time as the Keeper wishes; this may be min­utes, hours, days or weeks, depending on how the Keeper wants to shape the story. 
Whether a reading roll is called for is up to the Keeper, who may choose to grant automatic success to anyone with a modicum of skill in the appropriate language. 
To make a reading roll, the player makes an appropriate Language skill roll on 1D100. The Keeper decides on a diffi­culty level for reading the book based upon its age, form and condition Table XI: Mythos Tomes, pages (@@-@@). 
A book printed within the last century and in good condition would be of Regular difficulty. 
A handwritten work is likely to be of a Hard difficulty level, especially if it is old. 
The most challenging of ancient, moldering tomes, con­taining a mix of print and handwritten annotation, would be Extreme difficulty level. 

If the investigator fails the reading roll, they perhaps gets some inkling as to the content of the book, but have failed to comprehend it; no Sanity points are lost and no Cthul­hu Mythos skill is gained. The player may ask to push the roll, but must justify doing so, perhaps staying up all night reading or using reference books as an aid to study. When thinking of consequences for failing a pushed reading roll, the Keeper should be creative and include Sanity point loss. If in no hurry, they may continue to read the book without pushing the roll. The timing of the next reading roll is at the Keeper’s discretion (perhaps once per week). 
The Table XI: Mythos Tomes (pages @@-@@) indicates the Cthulhu Mythos skill points and Sanity point loss for each tome. Each tome has two values for Cthulhu Mythos: CMI (Cthulhu Mythos Initial) showing how many Cthulhu Mythos skill points are given for an initial reading, and CMF (Cthulhu Mythos Full) that shows how many points are given for full study of the tome. 
Once the investigator has made an initial reading, the Keeper should reward them with the initial reading (CMI) number. A roll should now be made for Sanity point loss; note that the Sanity roll is bypassed when reading a tome— the Sanity point loss is automatic. 
As well as gaining Cthulhu Mythos skill and losing Sanity points, the initial reading also allows the reader to learn about the contents of book and gain some idea of what spells it might contain. The reader will also have a clear idea of how long it will take to complete a full study of the book (see following). 
Full Study 
He had himself read many of them—a Latin version of 
the abhorred Necronomicon, the sinister Liber Ivonis, 
the infamous Cultes des Goules of Comte d'Erlette, the 
Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, and old Ludvig 
Prinn's hellish De Vermis Mysteriis. But there were others he 
had known merely by reputation or not at all—the Pnakotic 
Manuscripts, the Book of Dzyan, and a crumbling volume of wholly unidentifiable characters yet with certain symbols and diagrams shuddering recognizable to the occult student. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Haunter of the Dark 
A full study of a Mythos tome indicates a comprehensive reading as one might make when studying an academic work, or as a religious adherent might make of a sacred text. This may involve repeated readings, comparative reading, use of reference works, note taking, and so on. No reading roll is required; if any reading roll was required, it will have been made during the initial reading. 
Such a study can take many months. At the end of such a course of study, the reader must make a roll for Sanity point loss appropriate for the tome. The tome’s Mythos rating is then compared with the reader’s Cthulhu Mythos knowledge. If the reader’s Cthulhu Mythos skill is below the Mythos rating of the book, they gain Cthulhu Mythos points equal to the full study (CMF) number. If the reader’s Cthulhu Mythos skill is equal to or above the book’s Mythos rating, they only receive Cthulhu Mythos skill points equal to the initial reading (CMI) number of the book. 
Subsequent periods of full study may be undertaken, the difference being that each study will take twice as long as the previous one (double all reading times). Cthulhu Mythos skill increase and Sanity point loss are applied in the same way. In this way a single volume may be studied repeatedly over the years, but each time taking progressively longer than the last, and ultimately with diminishing returns. 
In the summaries of Mythos books (see Chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore), reading times for books are given in weeks. The Keeper should never feel at the mercy of such numbers and should shrink or increase them as appropriate. An outstanding academic with pertinent language skills will read a book faster than an earnest but uneducated jour­nalist. Time of study need not be consecutive days, weeks, or months. Note that for a subsequent study of a book, it is recommended that the full reading time is doubled and never reduced. 
Only one tome may be studied at a time. 

Mythos Rating—Books as References 
Once a full study of a tome has been completed, the percen­tiles entered for its Cthulhu Mythos Rating also quantify its usefulness as a Mythos reference. Such a book may be able to provide a specific fact about the Mythos (such as how long a chthonian takes to reach maturity, or where Y’golonac’s body awaits its resurrection) that might be useful to the investigator’s current situation or line of research. 
To research a specific piece of information, the investi­gator spends 1D4 game hours poring through the book. The player then rolls 1D100; if the result is equal to or less than the book’s Cthulhu Mythos Rating, the investigator finds the fact or an allusion to the fact (the Keeper can express the information as clearly or obscurely as desired). If the roll is failed, either the book does not hold the information or the reader failed to locate it. The user of the book will want to note what was or was not contained. 


Increase of Other Skills 
Conducting a full study of a tome may grant an increase in other skills as well as Cthulhu Mythos. After a full study of a tome, the reader automatically gains a skill tick for the language in which the book is written, and so their skill in that language may improve in the usual way during the next investigator development phase (see page @@). The Keeper should also determine whether a particular tome will pro­vide additional benefits to the reader. Increases should be either limited to +1D6 to +1D10 skill points per skill, or simply awarded as a skill tick to be rolled during the next investigator development phase. Other skills that may be improved as a result of reading Mythos tomes include (but are not limited to) History, Archaeology, Anthropology, Oc­cult, Astronomy and other sciences like Chemistry, Biology, and Physics. 
Occult Books 
The ideas for handling the information in Mythos books can also apply to non-Mythos books as well. An occult book by definition grants points to the Occult skill after being read. An occult book does not contain knowledge increasing the Cthulhu Mythos skill—otherwise it would be classified as a Mythos book. Some occult books may well include discus­sions of non-Mythos magic (see Non-Mythos Magic, page @@), including instructions for spells. An occult book may cost Sanity points if its contents warrant it. 

Using Magic 
Wisely did Ibn Schacabao say, that happy is the tomb where 
no wizard hath lain, and happy the town at night whose 
wizards are all ashes. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Festival 

Increasing the Cthulhu Mythos skill widens the horizons of the student but chips away at mental reserves (reducing max­imum Sanity points). However, learning about the Mythos may also let the scholar change reality in specific ways. These “packets of information” are organized as spells. They require activation, measured in the game by Magic points. 
Magic Points (MP) 
Magic points must (in most cases) be expended to cast spells, as well as to energize artifacts, power magical gates, and so on. An investigator begins the game with Magic points equal to one-fifth of his or her POW; however, cultists and powerful sorcerers often have larger pools of points from which to draw. 
Once an individual is out of Magic points, any further expenditure is deducted directly from hit points. Any such loss of hit points will manifest as physical damage in a form chosen by the Keeper—perhaps sores and cuts opening on the body, skin blistering, or blood running from the eyes or ears. 
Spending or sacrificing Magic points or points of POW takes only the will of the owner. Doing so may leave sensations of pleasure mingled with regret, a numbness of the soul, or may not be noticeable at all. The spell caster’s essence or energy is channeled into powering the spell. 
Some magical attacks leech Magic points or POW from unwilling targets. In those cases, loss may be characterized as being painful or as leaving a headache, or other minor symptoms. Involuntary loss of 10 POW would be a stronger sensation than that of losing the same amount of Magic points. 
If Magic points reach zero, the investigator deducts fur­ther Magic point loss from hit points (one for one). 
Regeneration of Magic points is a natural function, re­turning at one Magic point per hour (two Magic points per hour for those with POW over 100, three Magic points per hour if POW is over 200 and so on). The number of Magic points cannot regenerate to a value above one-fifth of the character’s POW. 
Magic points lost as hit points are healed according to the rules for Wounds and Healing (see page @@). Healing of hit points and regeneration of Magic points can occur concurrently. 
Were a character to obtain Magic points of a quantity greater than one-fifth of his or her POW, these could be spent, but the excess could not be regenerated. 
Learning a Spell 
A selection of spells for the game is presented alphabetically in Chapter 12: Grimoire. 
Learning a Mythos spell does not cost Sanity points; however, casting a Mythos spell does. 
Any individual can learn a spell. Studying the Mythos is the last thing a person should do, since increasing Mythos knowledge always brings the character closer and closer to the time when insanity or the Mythos stakes its claim. Sometimes circumstances demand such sacrifice. 
Knowledge of a spell can be transferred in three ways, listed below. Learning from a book is by far the most common method. 
Learning a Spell from a Mythos Book 
Following an investigator conducting an initial reading of a book, the Keeper will indicate the presence and summarize each of the spells in a sentence or two, assuming the book contains spells. The Keeper should not use the rulebook name of a spell, but might instead offer a description like “broughte forth a Great Winged Beast from ye void which did sore crowde my place of busyness,” in place of the too accurate and too bland Summon Byakhee. Likewise, a spell called “the unremitting terror,” sounds a lot more credible than Implant Fear. Suggestions for alternative names for spells are listed in Chapter 12: The Grimoire. 
To learn a spell from a Mythos book requires that the investigator has at least made an initial reading of the book. The investigator chooses the spell to study. Learning a spell can take hours, days, weeks, or months (typically 2D6 weeks, but at the Keeper’s discretion). Just as with reading a Mythos book, learning a Mythos spell may be taken up, put aside, and taken up again, as convenient. Usually a roll is called for at this stage; however, the Keeper may choose to grant automatic success, depending on the scenario. 
If success is not automatic, the player should attempt a Hard INT roll to learn the spell. If the player fails the roll, the investigator has not learnt the spell. The player may ask to push the roll, but must justify doing so; for example, the in­vestigator might lock themselves away in isolation until the spell is mastered. When thinking of consequences for failing a pushed roll, the Keeper should be creative and include Sanity point loss and strange magical effects—both upon the investigator and their surroundings. If investigator is in no hurry, they may continue to work on learning the spell without pushing the roll. The timing of the next INT roll is at the Keeper’s discretion (perhaps once per two weeks). 

Learning a Spell from Another Person 
Having learned a spell, a character may teach it to others. One-on-one teaching is quicker than one person learning from a book and, typically, a spell can be learnt in one week or less (1D8 days). Use the same rules as for learning a spell from a book, bearing in mind that the process will be faster. 
Learning a Spell from a Mythos Entity 
At will, any intelligent Mythos entity might supply a book or a scroll detailing a spell. More characteristically, the entity imparts such knowledge by means of dreams or visions; each episode is disturbing and alienating, gnawing away at the character’s sanity and will. This may happen quickly or slowly, as the story requires. A Mythos entity may imbue a complete spell in a character’s mind by telepathy, though such a powerful experience also might send the character directly to the asylum—the Keeper should consider the level of Sanity loss (a minimum of 1D6 is suggested). 
Once the process is complete, the Keeper may require the target to make a successful INT roll to retain knowledge of the spell. If this fails, the process must be started anew. 
Investigators rarely receive information in this manner; however, cultists often do. 

Casting Spells 
We have no business calling in such things from outside, and only very wicked people and very wicked cults ever try to. —H. P. Lovecraft, The Dunwich Horror 
Manipulating the forces of the Cthulhu Mythos leads to a loss of Sanity points in amounts that vary by spell. If some awful creature arrives in response to a spell, encountering it costs yet more Sanity points. Having no Sanity points does not prohibit spells from being cast—if it did, there would be no cultists. 
Nearly all spells and many magical artifacts also require Magic points (or POW, if that is the need), to be expended, otherwise the spell does not activate and nothing happens. 
Physical components may be necessary for particular spells. Such components may be reusable; for example, the great menhirs necessary for summoning He Who Is Not to Be Named (Call Hastur, see page@@). Other components may be consumed during the spell, such as the drinking of space-mead. 
The time required to cast a spell is variable—it may be 

Reading and translating Mythos tomes often takes months, even years. 
instantaneous, a few seconds, or a game minute, to a game week or longer. 
The caster must know the spell and recite a sometimes complex and lengthy chant or rite in authoritative tones. Usually the caster must have complete freedom of move­ment, since gesture can be as important as chant. 
A casting roll is required when a character attempts to cast a newly learned spell for the first time. Once a spell has been successfully cast (even if a pushed roll was required to do so), subsequent uses do not require a casting roll; non-player characters and monsters do not need to make casting rolls. 
A Hard POW roll is required to successfully cast a spell the first time. If the casting roll is successful, refer to the spell description for the outcome. If the casting roll is failed, nothing happens. 
Following a failed casting roll, the character has a choice whether to make a second attempt to cast the spell (paying the costs a second time)—either immediately or at any time in the future—and, in doing so, push the casting roll. 
If the pushed casting roll is successful, the spell works nor­mally without negative consequences. If the pushed casting roll is failed, the spell still works normally, but dire conse­quences ensue for the caster. Ultimately a spell can always be cast—the casting roll gauges the harm the caster suffers in the process rather than success or failure of the spell. 
The only alternative to this (other than giving up on the spell) is to go back to the source and learn the spell again from scratch—usually requiring another 2D6 weeks and a Hard INT roll. After relearning the spell, another initial casting roll may be made—this is a much more cautious approach than pushing the casting roll. This is one of the reasons why wizards seek to extend their lives—miscasting the greater spells can be a fast route to the grave! 
Failing a Pushed Casting Roll 
The caster must pay the cost of the spell (Magic points, San­ity points, and/or POW) multiplied by 1D6. Any overspend of Magic points is deducted from hit points—this can cause major wounds or death when pushing powerful spells. 
The Keeper should add one or more of the following side effects for less powerful spells (choose or roll 1D8). Note that both the caster and others nearby can be affected. 
1: Blurred vision or temporary blindness. 
2: Disembodied screaming, voices or other noises. 
3: Strong winds or other atmospheric effects. 
4: Bleeding—either from the caster, others present or the environment (e.g. the walls). 
5: Strange visions and hallucinations. 
6: Small animals in the vicinity explode. 
7: Foul smell of brimstone. 

8: Mythos monster is accidentally summoned. 
For more powerful spells (those that summon gods or cost POW for example), the side effects can be worse: 
1: Earth shaking, walls rent asunder. 
2: Epic thunder and lightning. 
3: Blood falls from the sky. 
4: The caster’s hand is withered and burnt. 
5: The caster ages unnaturally (+2D10 years and apply characteristic modifiers, see Ageing, page @@). 
6: Powerful or numerous Mythos entities appear, at­tacking all those nearby, starting with the caster! 
7: The caster or everyone nearby are sucked to a dis­tant time or place. 
8: Mythos deity is accidentally called. 
When hit points are lost as a result of overspending Magic points, the Keeper should narrate the physical harm as a part of the physical consequence of the casting. 

Evidence of Spells Being Cast 
The damage done by a spell is probably obvious. A visible manifestation of a spell being cast may not be so apparent. If it is, one might spot a peculiar hand gesture or body move­ment, or notice some unusual item or necessary ingredient. In themselves, such effects will begin to establish a tone for Mythos magic, so Keepers are cautioned to keep such effects low-key. However, the effects could be wide-ranging, from hid­eous roars from beyond, gouts of fire, lines of electrical force, pale nimbuses and auroras of various colors, to the rushing of winds, raised hackles, ionized air, prickly sensations, the stench of sulfur, howling and hissing animals, murmuring voices, alarming moans, or whatever the Keeper thinks fitting. 
Disrupted Spell Casting 
The casting of a spell will be disrupted if the caster is sig­nificantly distracted (physically struck or shot, for example) during its casting.. The Keeper may consult the charts for the consequences of failing a pushed casting roll (page @@) for inspiration on what might happen. The caster of a failed spell casting must still pay the Sanity point and Magic point costs. 
Becoming a Believer 
Leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, was not 
a region I would care to be in or near, nor did I relish the 
proximity of a world that had ever bred such ambiguous and 
Archaean monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned. 
At the moment I felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred 
Necronomicon, or talked so much with that unpleasantly 
erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the university. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, At the Mountains of Madness 
An investigator who comes face-to-face with a deep one or a ghoul has an experience that leaves no option but to believe in the cosmic horror of the Cthulhu Mythos. However, reading the Cultes des Goules while safe in an apartment with the lights on, the reader might dismiss the contents as a work of fantasy. This is the player’s prerogative, but disbelief has it perils. 
Whether one believes what is read or not, the knowledge is still absorbed. If the character chooses not to believe what is read then the Cthulhu Mythos knowledge granted by the book is added to the investigator’s skill and maximum Sanity points are reduced by the corresponding amount, but no Sanity points are lost. In this way an investigator can accumulate considerable knowledge of the Cthulhu Mythos without losing any Sanity points at all. However, when encountering evidence of the Mythos firsthand, the investigator will realize that those accursed books held the truth! At that point the investigator becomes a believer and immediately loses Sanity points equal to his or her present Cthulhu Mythos score. 
Keepers may be relieved that this requires little bookkeep­ing on their part. The player records their investigator’s gain of Cthulhu Mythos skill as normal and it is that value that is 
"Shoot..was that a ph'ngui or a ph'nguy?" 

deducted from their Sanity points when becoming a believer. 
An investigator can choose to remain a nonbeliever until forced to lose Sanity points for encountering the Mythos first­hand. Viewing human corpses or torture may cause Sanity point loss, but such loss does not lead to belief in the Mythos. 
A nonbeliever may read Mythos books and learn (but not cast) spells. Firsthand experience of the Mythos always calls for a Sanity roll, and the loss of one or more of Sanity points compel an investigator to believe in the Cthulhu Mythos thereafter. However, even some firsthand experiences may not convince a disbeliever; if a Sanity roll is passed for encoun­tering a deep one (SAN 0/1D6) no Sanity points are lost and, as such, an investigator might remain a nonbeliever, perhaps rationalizing the creature as Earthly human mutation. How­ever, meeting a clearly unearthly being or a manifestation of one of the gods of the Mythos will always be enough to rip through the façade of the investigator’s beliefs. 
An investigator can become a believer at any point the player wishes (and take the Sanity point loss). 
How Sorcerers Get That Way 
Though investigators rarely have the chance, sorcerers and cultists sometimes swagger around with unseemly amounts of Power (POW). Where did it come from? 
When a character successfully casts a spell requiring an opposed POW roll to affect the target, this creates a chance for the caster’s POW to increase through this “exercise”. If the caster wins the opposed POW roll, a subsequent roll to increase his or her POW may be attempted. If the result of a 1D100 roll is greater than the caster’s POW (or the roll is 96 or greater), the caster’s POW increases by 1D10 points permanently. 

Optional rules Spontaneous use of the Cthulhu Mythos skill 
Knowledge of the Cthulhu Mythos not only allows a character to learn and cast spells, it also allows someone to improvise magical effects akin to spells. This is resolved in the same way as any regular skill use. The player first states an aim; the Keep­er then considers if the aim is acceptable, suggesting a lesser aim in preference to blocking the player’s proposal if possible. 
The default difficulty level for use of the Cthulhu Mythos skill in this way is Regular (the player needs to roll equal to or under the investigator’s Cthulhu Mythos skill). Alternatively, if the character is using their Cthulhu Mythos skill to affect a target that is resisting them, treat this as an opposed roll between the caster’s Cthulhu Mythos skill and the target’s POW; no further POW-versus-POW roll is required. In addition, the Keeper must decide on a cost in Magic points and Sanity points. The Keeper should gauge the cost and make it similar to a comparable spell. See the guidance in Chapter 11: Playing the Game. 
The cost and consequence of pushing the Cthulhu Mythos skill roll and failing are the same as those for failing a pushed spell casting roll. The Keeper may allow the player’s aim to be achieved when a pushed roll is failed, however this is not guaranteed as it is for a spell. 
Unlike casting a spell, using the Cthulhu Mythos skill to achieve a given effect must be rolled for every time. Some illustrations of spontaneous Cthulhu Mythos skill use: 
As a reward for any Luck roll result of 01, POW can be said to have been exercised. Roll the percentage dice and if the roll is greater than the character’s POW, or if the roll is 96 or greater, the character’s POW increases by 1D10 points permanently. 
The character may be able to arrange a gift of or a trade for POW from some Mythos deity. The rationale for this is best left to the Keeper. Such an event is likely to increase Cthulhu Mythos as well, and would cost additional Sanity points besides those lost in communicating with the entity. 
Increasing Power does not increase current Sanity points. 
Non-Mythos Magic 
Other earthly magic or religiosity can be significant and can have effects in the game if the Keeper wills it. Such earthly “magick” may be real or fraudulent; this is for the Keeper (perhaps in discussion with the player group) to determine. 
Mechanics and procedures for such magic should be the same as those for Mythos magic, though the means and aims of earthly magic will greatly differ. If non-Mythos magic is accepted in your game, it is suggested that you tie it to the Occult skill. Horrific deeds should always cost Sanity points. 
To cause physical harm to one target: the caster chooses the number of Magic points expended, and loses half that number of Sanity points. To be effective, the caster needs to beat the target in an opposed Cthulhu Mythos versus POW roll. If the caster wins the roll, the target takes damage equal to the number of magic points expended. Nelson extends his hand and screams, “Die!” The veins on his arms bulge and turn black, and he focuses on the approaching beast. Nelson’s player spends 8 Magic points and 4 Sanity points, and then makes a Cthulhu Mythos skill roll, getting a Hard success (below half his skill). The Keeper makes a POW roll for the target, achieving a Regular success–Nelson wins. The Keeper describes the beast’s veins erupting in a mess of gore and deducts 8 hit points. 
To banish a monster: the caster spends Magic points equal to one-fifth of the monster’s POW and 1D3 Sanity points. The caster must then succeed in an opposed Cthulhu Mythos versus POW roll against the monster. Enoch stands silently with eyes closed as the dark young of Shub-Niggurath stomps out of the tree line. Enoch has only 14 Magic points and must expend 18 to attempt to banish the monstrosity. He does so; taking 4 hit points of harm (the excess Magic point cost is paid in hit points). He whispers strange words to the beast, uncaring of the bloody tears that are flowing from his now open eyes. Enoch’s player makes a Cthulhu Mythos skill roll, getting a Regular success. The Keeper makes a POW roll for dark young, achieving a Hard success–the dark young wins. The Keeper tells how the dark young strides towards Enoch, who lacks the Magic points to push the roll and so turns to flee. 


To commune with the recently deceased: costs the caster 10 Magic points plus 1D10 Sanity points. The effects last a few rounds. Charlie dies just as the investigators get to him. “Tell us who killed you,” they ask him, but it is too late. Placing her hands on Charlie’s chest, Violet implores Charlie to speak. Violet’s player spends 10 Magic points and 3 Sanity points, and then makes a successful Cthulhu Mythos skill roll. The Keeper explains, “You hear Charlie’s words croak from Violet’s throat…” The other players can now talk with Charlie for a few rounds. The Keeper decides enough has been said and says, “Blood begins to bubble up in Violet’s throat. Violet you’re back! But you feel cold, so cold!” 




You ask me to explain why I am afraid of a draught of cool air; why I shiver more than others upon enter­ing a cold room, and seem nauseated and repelled when the chill of evening creeps through the heat of a mild autumn day. There are those who say I respond to cold as others do to a bad odour, and I am the last to deny the impression. What I will do is to relate the most horrible circumstance I ever encountered, and leave it to you to judge whether or not this forms a suitable explanation of my peculiarity. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, Cool Air 


eing the Keeper can be immensely rewarding; you get to make a lot of decisions about what happens during the game, present the mystery to the players, and portray numerous non-play­er characters and monsters. You will also be the 

final arbiter of how rules are applied, and this chapter contains advice and guidance intended to help you use those rules to best effect. 
Before reading this chapter make sure you have read chapters 4-10. 
New Keepers 
When you act as Keeper you become the game moderator. Whether you are using a published scenario or creating one of your own, you alone know the story plot, the likely out­comes and solutions. Your job is to present the mystery and story during play, incidentally playing the roles of monsters and sinister or ordinary people that the investigators meet. You have the responsibility for preparing and running the scenario without bias. Above all else, you should listen to your players and react to what they say and do. 
Having a good understanding of the game and the rules is essential in enabling you to answer player questions and to be able to present the material fairly. You will find individual monster and spell descriptions in other chapters—you don’t need to memorize this information, just be familiar with it. 
With the purchase of this book and some dice, you have everything needed to play Call of Cthulhu. It is recom­mended that you start with The Haunting (see page @@), the first of the scenarios from this book. This scenario has been specifically presented for new Keepers, with advice dotted throughout the text. Read the scenario through and then invite some friends over to play it. Have them create investigators together—be sure to have the relevant sheets printed out or photocopied in advance. 
Summarize the rules for your players. Don’t try to ex­plain every rule in detail—just give them a brief overview and then address specific rules as they arise in play. Once everyone is ready, introduce the scenario and work your way through it. 
Do not be concerned if you make some mistakes the first time around. When you have finished playing, read through the rules and this chapter again. After having run one game, the rules and advice will make a lot more sense. You will continue to hone your “Keepering” skills over a number of games as you become more familiar with the game. 
You may wish to invent your own scenarios—that’s great, but it’s probably best to start with the ones in this book or consult one of the many Call of Cthulhu scenario supple­ments available. Published scenarios can be a great source of information about crafting a story into an adventure, as well as providing an insight into how the game can be played. 
Experienced Keepers 

The Call of Cthulhu roleplayinggame has been around for over30 years, so many of you readingthis will be old hands when it comes to running the game. Youwill have noticed that this edition presents somemodifications to the rules and this chapter is intended to offeradvice on how to integrate these changes in to your game. 
Finding Players 
Okay, so you’ve got the Call of Cthulhu rulebook and some roleplaying dice and you’re ready to run a game–except you’ve got no players! What can you do? 
Here are a few ideas to get you gaming: 
Talk to your friends. Show them the rulebook and tell them about how cool the game sounds. Perhaps get them to read one of Lovecraft’s stories to see if they like it, preferably a short one like The Outsider. You could also ask family members to try the game. Essen­tially, you only need a Keeper and one player, but if you can get two or three players together then that’s ideal. 
Ask in your local hobby store or put a notice up. Talk to the staff in the hobby store and ask if there is a game of Call of Cthulhu you can join—many stores have gaming rooms where people can get together to play. Perhaps a group is looking for a new player? Failing that, ask if you can put a notice up saying that you want to start a Call of Cthulhu game and need players. 
Many schools, colleges and universities have roleplaying societies and groups. If there’s not one where you are, per­haps you can start one. This can be a really good way to meet like-minded people. 
Go to a local gaming convention. Gaming conventions come in all shapes and sizes, and they are held all around the world. Perhaps your local gaming store can point you in the right direction. Conventions provide the opportunity to meet new people, make friends and play games. Even though you might not find anyone local to you, you’ll have the chance to play games and get some experience before starting your own group. 

Look online at Cthulhu gaming sites. Look at www. yog-sothoth.com and www.mu-podcast.com, where people from all around the world discuss Call of Cthulhu. 
Preparing to Play the Game 
The purpose of roleplaying is to have a good time—that should not need saying, but as with any hobby, some people get so caught up in the moment that they lose sight of this most basic of requirements. 
Some tips for creating atmosphere in your games: 
Try to play in a room where there is no one but the gam­ing group; having your daughter running around the table or your brother watching football on TV in the same room is not going to help! 
Set up the gaming area appropriately. Close the curtains and dim the lights a little (remember you still need to be able to read the scenario and the players need to be able to see their investigator sheets and the dice). Using low-light lamps, LED penlights or candles can be very effective—but never leave lit candles unattended! 
Turn cell/mobile phones to silent (or preferably turn them off) for the duration of the game. Likewise, put away the computers and tablets—everyone’s focus should be on the game. Being distracted by electronic devices is a surefire way to dispel any sense of atmosphere. 
Suitable music playing low in the background can be great for establishing a mood. Avoid pop and rock songs as familiarity and the sudden changes in tempo and volume can work against you. Look for atmospheric classical mu­sic or soundscapes of electronic music. Published music especially written for horror roleplaying games can also be purchased. Period music (appropriate to the scenario) can also help, such as twenties jazz played at a low volume. 
Setting the Tone 
Consider what sort of game you want to run. You can aim for high tension, over-the-top schlock horror or a pulp-ac­tion romp. Having said that, the default mode for this game is intended to be horror with some action scenes thrown into the mix. 
You should decide, as a group, whether the game is to be serious or jocular. Comedy and horror are good bedfel­lows and the switch from one to the other is used to great effect in many movies. However, too much comedy lessens the horror. The way that you act (as Keeper) reinforces or undermines the tone. As Keeper, you may find that the play­ers take their lead from you, not only in what you say, but how you behave. You may set the scene and gradually build the pace and the tension, only to have a player make a joke remark and for everyone to fall about laughing, breaking the tension and ruining the atmosphere. Shared jokes and laughing are important, but as the game draws to a climax, so too should the horror. 
Investigators don't always sleep easy. 

If you are seeking a more intense gaming experience, talk to your players about atmosphere and tell them at the start of a gaming session that tonight’s game will be more enjoyable for all if you can work together on building and maintaining a good atmosphere. Some groups use the first 30 minutes of a gaming session to share news, tell jokes, and relax—getting this all out of the way before the game begins. Try to draw a clear line between “social” time and “game” time. 
This is a horror game, and you can expect players to enjoy being scared; however, people have differing views of what is acceptable, and these limits should be discussed before play. Ask your players if there is anything that they definitely do not want to see in the game. The answers can be quite unexpect­ed; one player may be fine with everything except violence to animals, for example. Establish the level of their objection and either avoid the topic entirely or use the dramatic effect of “fading to black” when it occurs in play. 
Distasteful Historical Themes 
Distasteful issues may arise during the game. You may feel that your portrayal of fictional prejudice and bigotry is worthy of an Oscar; however, another player may find it offensive. The world was a very different place in the 1920s. Behaviors most of us would find repugnant today were or­dinary and acceptable then. Racism, xenophobia, religious bias and sexual discrimination were part of everyday life and often loudly espoused. Many laws systematically supported segregation and discrimination of every sort, and social forces of great power underwrote that legislation. 
Scenario authors and Keepers can choose to ignore so­cial history as not germane or decide to incorporate specific elements into their plots. Both approaches can be found in published scenarios. Ultimately how you play it is up to you and your group, but if you are going to use themes of discrimination in the game, it is strongly recommended that you discuss the issue early on. 
Creating Investigators 
Creating an investigator is straightforward—just follow the rules in Chapter 3: Creating Investigators. There is plenty of supplementary information on period settings and professions that can help the players expand and flesh out their investigators. A good place for more information is in the numerous Call of Cthulhu source books published by Chaosium, especially the Investigator’s Handbook, as this includes a lot of extra information and options for players. 
Advising the Players 
Once you are familiar with your scenario it is time to brief the players so that they can create suitable investigators. For a standard scenario the players can be presented with an initial premise: 
• 
The date and location of the scenario. 

• 
A basic description of how the scenario begins. 

• 
Suggested professions suitable to the scenario’s premise. 

• 
Suggestions for how the investigators know each other. 


The more information the players have to work with, the better they can create investigators who will be tied in to the plot and possess motivation to follow the story path. 
There may be quite a lot you can say about the initial premise without giving away too much of what is to come. When discussing the initial premise, you might consider telling the players information that would be unknown to their investigators at the outset of play 
gator’s brother has been murdered”. That’s fine, but some players may not feel affected by the death of a fictional rela­tive. However, if you volunteer the story-hook as a question to the players (“There’s been a murder, tell me who’s been killed.”), a player may suggest the link (“Could the deceased be my brother?”). When the motivation is coming from the player, you can be sure it will hold a lot more emotional resonance for that particular player than something you impose. 
This exchange works both ways. Just as the player should pick up on story-hooks that you provide, you should pick up on what the players say about their characters. The players are encouraged to come up with interesting backstories for their investigators, and you should listen to what the players say and try to weave it in to your existing story. These sto­ry-hooks might be listed as investigator backstories or be implied by the choice of profession or skills. 
Weave the investigators and the plot together wherever possible. This may feel contrived at times, but good drama is often a contrivance. Consider the cast of non-player char­acters in the scenario. How many of them could be family members, friends, enemies or associates that the players have mentioned in their investigator backstories? You may have some detailed non-player characters prepared as part of the plot—consider if any of those non-player characters could be played as investigators. Don’t allow the non-player characters to outshine the investigators. 
Ask the players questions about their investigators– their backstories, aspirations, friends, and rivals, and take note of any replies that might be incorporated or noted for use later. Alternatively, you might suggest amendments to be made to an investigator that will integrate them more closely to the plot. As stated earlier, this is a two-way process and every­thing is mutable at this stage. Get it right now and the game will flow more smoothly. 

Investigator Groups (I): Integrated Investigators 
Try to throw out as many “hooks” as possible in your initial premise. One way to involve a player is to place a family member or friend in jeopardy; for example, “Your investi­
Many of the details in your scenario, such as place names and character names, can easily be changed without affecting the core of the scenario. Incorporating names and other details that the players come up with can make those elements of the scenario feel more real to the players, and produces a more collaborative story to which everyone has contributed. 


Investigator Groups (II): Random Investigators 
Some scenarios, especially “one-shots”, will work with a ran­dom mix of investigators. In this case, simply allow each player to create an investigator, then find a way of bringing them together and a reason for them to engage with the scenario. The benefit of this approach is that players get free rein to make their investigators however they wish. This can work well in a scenario that takes random people and throws them in to a sit­uation, but is not so good for a more open-ended investigative scenario or campaign where the players would struggle for a reason why their investigators would work together. 

Investigator Groups (III): Pre-Generated Investigators 
You can create the investigators before play and then distrib­ute them among the players. This approach works well for games where play is restricted to a set time slot, such as at a gaming convention.
 Try to remember the following factors when designing investigators for other people: 
Archetypes are quickly accessible: The grizzled ex-cop, curious reporter, etc. 
Balance: Try to balance the group so that each player will get a turn in the spotlight. Consider the requirements of the sce­nario in terms of skills and plot-hooks, and share these out among the investigators. Avoid basing the scenario around one investigator, as this may leave the other players feeling they are playing mere cameo roles. Presenting balanced in­vestigators does not require that every investigator be equal­ly good at all things. Just be sure that each investigator has strengths that will come in to play; one investigator might be good with their fists, while another is strong academically. 
Backstory: Write a backstory for each investigator, but don’t write too much because some players may struggle to remember or make use of backstory information. If the scenario depends upon a particular investigator knowing certain information, be sure to make it very clear to the player—don’t hide it in a large body of text. Be sure to allow players time to read and digest their backstories at the start of play, and consider using bullet points to summarize es­sential information. 
Unallocated skill points: Consider leaving some skill points unallocated to allow each player to customize their own investigator. 
Tell each investigator what he or she knows about the other investigators: You may also want to provide a brief resume for each investigator, listing what he or she knows about the other investigators, though this is not essential. If you do write one, it should be partial, being based on that particular investigator’s point of view—an individual’s per­ception of a particular person can conflict with another’s, or be wholly mistaken. 
Say what they know, not how they feel: Rather than dic­tating how an investigator feels in their backstory, tell the player the “facts” as their investigator perceives them, and let the player decide what is true and how they feel about it. 

Write reciprocal backstory information: If you write a statement for one investigator regarding another, be sure to write a reciprocal statement on the other investigator’s sheet. As already stated, different investigators may perceive different versions of the same truth. 

Approving the Investigators 
Take a few minutes to look over the investigator sheets. En­sure the players have completed their investigators correctly (have skill points all been spent?) Then note down a few de­tails about each investigator along with names, occupations, APP, Credit Rating, and any key aspects of their backstory that catch your attention. 
Key information can be summarized in a reference chart, using the format at the bottom of the page. 
Avoid being unnecessarily harsh when reviewing inves­tigators; remember that regardless of how skilled or well­armed an investigator may appear to be, the monsters of the Cthulhu Mythos will always be more powerful. 
Name  Profession  APP  Credit  Backstory  Notes  
Rating  
Todd Rahman  Private Eye  65  30  Buddhist.  Police issue handgun.  
Runs Rockwell Investigations in NYC.  
Pat Swift  Ex-Athlete  75  20  Health-food fanatic.  Loves his elderly mother.  
Proud of his sporting trophies.  
Worships the New York Yankees.  

Todd Rahman saved his life and he now works for Todd. 
Creating New Occupations 
If none of the published list of professions fit your require­ments when creating investigators, or if you simply prefer, just choose any combination of eight skills that best fit the investigator’s occupation. Don’t forget to determine a range for Credit Rating. This is a quick and easy method, allowing for spontaneity and speed. 
Linking Investigators When Playing Subsequent Scenarios 
The advice offered above for tying characters to the scenario may work well enough for their first adventure, however this can become labored if overused. If you are running unre­lated scenarios with the same investigators, a good reason is required for them to be repeatedly involved in foiling the plots of the Mythos. A deceased uncle is all very well for one plotline, but what about next time? Just how many murdered relatives can one investigator have?  
Many scenarios are conceived and written as an inter­esting story, with the investigators added on afterwards. Some form of motivation must be chosen as a reason for the investigators to connect with the plot. 
Common motivations include: 
G Employment: The investigators are professionals available for hire. 
G A social connection: A friend or member of an investigator’s family, who is integral to the plot. 
G Personal gain: A chance to find fame or fortune. 
G Altruism: Saving others, perhaps even saving the world itself. 
G Moral code: Battling evil as a result of personal convictions. 
The investigator’s background is there to help in this respect. The initial backstory written by the players serves to build their characters and define their connections to the world. The entries that you add or amend during play should provide connections between that character and the Mythos, especially those that are the result of madness. Try to word backstory entries in a way that might push the character to pursue the Mythos, such as: 
G An insatiable appetite for knowledge that man was not meant to know. 
G You cannot rest until the Cult of the Black Pharaoh is destroyed. 
G Every night you dream of a sunken city; you hear voices calling your name. 
G The answer must lie in the Necronomicon. 

Non-Player Characters (NPCs) 
The players control their investigators; the Keeper controls everyone else in the world, known as non-player characters. These can come into the game in a number of ways. 
You may find that players suggest ideas for non-player characters when making their investigators: relatives, colleagues, friends, or enemies. Refer to the investigators’ backstories for these and take careful note of any details for later incorporation into the scenario. 
Investigators may establish contacts during the game (see Contacts page @@). 
Your plot will include some key non-player characters— the villains! 
The game will inevitably lead to encountering new non-player characters. Every street, every bar, every library has people in it for the investigators to talk to. 
The important non-player characters in published sce­narios will have their characteristics and a selection of skills already drawn up; however, there are always non-player characters the investigators will wish to speak to in addition to those already prepared. You may need to come up with skills and characteristics for these improvised non-player characters as required during play—and this can easily be done. Of course, you will only need skills or characteristics for your non-player characters if they are opposing an inves­tigator in some way—often you can just play the interaction without concern for any skill values or numbers. 
When an investigator makes a skill roll versus a non-play­er character, you will need to establish whether the difficulty level for the player is Regular, Hard, or Extreme. To do this, consider the skill or characteristic being used in opposition by the non-player character. As Keeper, you should make a swift and arbitrary decision whether a particular skill or characteristic is a key aspect of that character’s profession. If the skill or characteristic directly relates to the non-player character’s profession, then it would be rated at 50% or higher, and thus the difficulty level should be Hard. If this is not the case, the skill is below 50%, so a Regular difficulty level is set. Only in truly exceptional circumstances should the difficulty level be set to Extreme (few non-player charac­ters will have even a single skill of 90% or above). 

If combat rolls are called for, arbitrarily assign some combat values on the spot: average Joe (unskilled) 25%; barroom brawler or hired thug 40%; trained killer 70%. 
While prepared non-player characters will be provided with notes for you to interpret, ad-hoc non-player charac­ters won’t have their personalities and goals predetermined. How you play these characters is up to you, but if you wish to introduce a random element, refer to non-player charac­ter reactions to the investigators (see page @@). 
Roleplaying Non-Player Characters 
Roleplay is at the heart of this game, and it’s your job as Keeper to reinforce this. While the players get to play one character each, you get to play everyone else, and the key thing is that you roleplay the non-player characters. Rather than telling the players what they learn from the barman, take the role of the barman yourself. Try to alter your voice, perhaps speaking with an appropriate accent or changing the tone and volume of your voice. Don’t be afraid to act the part, using gestures and mannerisms to help the players build a mental image of the person they are interacting with. 
It’s common for players to view the Keeper as being in charge of the game and as such they will look to you for how to play, modeling their performances on yours. Some people are a little shy, but when they see and hear you talking “in character,” they will feel encouraged to do likewise. Teach by example and reward them for getting in to the spirit of the game. If a player really gets into character and makes a strong argument, then you might reward the player by for­going a Persuade roll, or at least lower the difficulty level of the roll. Don’t feel compelled to reward strong roleplaying every time; roleplaying is enjoyable in itself and shouldn’t require constant reward. 
When possible, try to bring previously established non-player characters back in to play. Doing this builds the feeling of consistency and continuity. Consider how television shows do this. When investigators want to know the word on the street, they may visit the same bar where they are familiar with Bernie the barkeep. Bernie soon becomes a character in his own right and his story becomes entwined with that of the investigators. 
Remember to 
Placing non-player character 

present non-player
characters contacts at risk will provide 
in a believable further motivation for the 
way. The use players. When the players 
of accents and hear that cultists picked Ber­
mannerisms can 
nie the barkeep as a sacrifice 

quickly establish 
to their dark god, it’s going 

a character’s 
to be more meaningful than 

personality in 
if it were just an unknown 

the minds of the 
victim. 

players. 
Roleplaying Hooks 
Everybody wants something. Have non-player characters approach the investigators with requests, demands, and problems. Consider how events in the story might create problems for non-player characters. These non-player characters will want help with their problems and, wherever possible, you should direct their requests for help to the investigators. If a non-player character has something the players want, the non-player character will probably want something in return. 
As an aid to presenting non-player characters in play, list two or three of these “roleplaying hooks” alongside each of the key non-player characters in your scenario. The hooks are more than personality traits or clues; they are plot drivers that allow the non-player character to hook an investigator like a fish on a line. Your players will soon be pulled in multiple directions by various hooks and if most of these hooks are rooted in your core plot then your story will become more layered and engaging. 

Presenting the Authorities 
The Keeper should define the function and purpose of a given authority in the context of the scenario. A sheriff or a judge, for instance, can be a great help or a great ob­struction to an investigation; perhaps by controlling access to evidence, the non-player character may willfully pursue personal theories concerning a crime rather than cheerfully adopting the ideas of the investigators, and may even blindly order the arrest of the investigators as suspects, or hold them as material witnesses. 
Uniformly portraying authorities as sleazy opportunists, corrupt fools, and rigid bumpkins enforces a cliché that can corrode the heart of the game. Call of Cthulhu assumes that humanity and human civilization considers itself worth defending and saving. However bad humanity can be, the Mythos is far worse. Since investigators risk their lives to save such people, some authorities must be shown to be worth the struggle. The truth is that some are and some are not. If the investigators encounter authorities with well-rounded characters, freely capable of good and bad, they can make up their own minds about the value of society. 
Non-Player Character Reactions to the Investigators 
You decide how non-player characters react to an investiga­tor; however, if you want to test the non-player character’s reaction to an investigator, you can make a concealed roll using either the investigator's APP or Credit Rating. Which one you use is determined by the situation and the non-play­er character; ask yourself whether wealth or looks is more likely to influence the particular non-player character? If you are unsure, use the higher of the two. It’s a good idea to take note of each investigator’s APP and Credit Rating skill at the start of the game. 
To perform the test, roll 1D100 and compare it to either the investigator's Credit Rating or APP. If the dice result is below the target number, the reaction is positive; otherwise the reaction is negative. How you portray a positive or negative reaction in play is up to you. An initial negative reaction should make the investigator's life more difficult, especially if the player’s intention is to befriend or influence the non-player character. This test is intended for use with non-player characters who have no outstanding reason to like or dislike the investigator. 

Playing Within the Limits of Character Knowledge 
When roleplaying non-player characters, remember that they don’t know everything that you know as Keeper. It’s easy to make non-player characters infallible, but it can be a lot more fun to play up their flaws. Non-player characters can make mistakes, misunderstand, and fail just as readily as the investigators. Cultists are only human, so let them make human mistakes too. Their mistakes may serve to further confound the players, who may seek some rationale for the non-player characters’ curiously mistaken activities. 


Using props to present NPCs 
Games of Call of Cthulhu can feature a wide variety of non-player characters—that’s before we even get to the monsters! Keeping track of who’s who can be daunting for both the Keeper and the players. Prepar­ing some simple props ahead of the game can help. 
A quick and easy way to differentiate between non-player characters is to find a portrait for each of them. Most published scenarios include a drawing or photograph of each of the important non-player char­acters that the investigators will meet. Having a copy of these allows you to show the players who they are speaking to. If you are running a scenario of your own design or one where images of the non-player charac­ters are not provided, a quick search on the Internet can provide a range of suitable character portraits for you to print and cut out. Try looking at websites fea­turing people of the period in which the game is set. For example, galleries of 1920s film stars are available 


Prepare a List of Names 
You will have to name non-player characters during play. It’s a good idea to have a list of names ready so that you can pick one with ease rather than fumbling around only to come up with a common name such as “Bob”. Fumbling for a name is a sure sign to the players that the character is not cen­tral to the plot, and you should try to make all non-player characters feel equally real. Using names appropriate for the place and period gives an increased sense of realism. Once you’ve decided that the owner of the Castle Stahleck is called Fabian Azoth, you simply make a quick note alongside the name on your list for future reference. 
Pick-Up Non-Player Characters 
As previously stated, players play their investigators and you play the non-player characters. Occasionally a situation may present itself in which it is possible to hand a group of non-player characters over to the players’ control, thus al­lowing the non-player characters to be played by the players (temporarily replacing their investigators) for a time. 




Pick-up non-player characters don’t require a full char­acter sheet; indeed, the less you give the player, the freer the player may feel. Sometimes it is easier to improvise around a simple archetype than to portray a fully detailed character. A simple index card with a name, profession and a few key characteristics or skills is enough for one scene—fill in any other statistics as they are called for. If it’s a combat scene then combat skills, weapons and hit points should be de­tailed in advance or quickly generated in play. 
Playing a non-player character allows the player to “see” through the eyes of a character that is not his or her usual investigator and discover things that the player would oth­erwise be unaware of. This conflict of knowledge happens all the time in roleplaying—every time the investigators split up, a player may hear about things that are not being perceived through his or her investigator. The latter is easily overlooked as it can be generally assumed that fellow inves-tigators fill each other in on what they have discovered. How you and your players deal with knowledge gained when playing pick-up non-player characters is up to you. This technique of playing other characters can be used to build tension and boost the horror. 


Making the Most of the Investigator’s  Backstory 
The investigator backstory can be a springboard for story development. Consider how each investigator’s backstory could drive the story forward and provide plot inspiration. While some backstory entries could possibly link to the sce­nario’s central plot, the majority are more likely to form the basis for subplots. The players will be more involved if you can weave such entries into the broad story of the scenario. 

Corrupting Backstory Entries as a Result of Madness 
The only way to hurt a man who has lost everything is to give him back something broken. —Stephen Donaldson, The Wounded Land. 
When preparing a scenario (or between sessions), think about the investigators’ backstories and how the entries might be corrupted, undermined or distorted, given the likely events of the scenario. 

This is a game of horror, and horror is most effective when it hits close to home. In Lovecraft’s story The Shadow over Innsmouth, the ultimate threat to the narrator’s sanity comes not from the terrible monsters he encounters but from the realization concerning his own bloodline. 
Plan out your intentions regarding investigator backsto­ries from the outset so that they can be woven in to the story. When a backstory entry is later corrupted, the revelation will flow naturally and be more pertinent to both the player and the overall story. 
It can sometimes be difficult to come up with an appro­priate entry in the middle of a game, so having a list of ideas prepared before the game can help, either tailored to specific investigators or just a general list that can be tweaked and handed out as needed. 
Each time an investigator experiences a bout of madness, you may add or amend a backstory entry on the investiga­tor’s sheet. Corrupting an existing backstory entry rather than replacing it with something completely new can be more effective in building the story, and serves to maintain a sense of continuity. Changing a backstory entry may have a direct effect on the investigator’s mind—the game reality has not changed; rather, the investigator has had a realiza­tion concerning some aspect of it. 

You are never compelled to amend backstory entries as a result of investigator insanity or injury. It may be that the game is in full flow and you do not wish to pause the action while you consider. Or it may be that you have changed an 
Martha discovers the secret of her mother's heirloom mirror. 
investigator’s backstory recently and do not wish to make any further alterations at the time. If you wish, you can delay the changes to allow yourself time to think, and then apply them before the next session of play. 
Rolling Dice 

Dice Rule 1: The Keeper decides when to call for a skill roll. 
You (as Keeper) decide on the difficulty level for each skill roll and, by extension, decide whether a skill roll is re­quired at all. If the task is routine and no drama is involved then it doesn’t require a roll. There may be instances when you want the action to move on quickly or want to avoid adding complications to the proceedings and allow the players to do something difficult without a roll; as Keeper, this is your prerogative. 
Dice Rule 2: Dice don’t tell stories; people do. 
The dice do not decide what winning or losing means in your story; that’s the Keeper’s job. When a player wins a skill roll, his or her goal is achieved (as agreed before the roll), but when they lose, the Keeper decides what happens. 
Dice Rule 3: Losing a roll doesn’t necessarily mean failing the goal. 
There are two possible outcomes of a skill roll: win or lose. It is important to realize that losing a dice roll does not automatically lead to failing the task. 
Things go the way the player wants when a Pushed skill roll is won (the player’s goal is achieved). 
When a player loses in a Pushed skill roll things go the way the Keeper wants (the goal may or not be achieved and additional negative consequences occur). 
One of the keys to running a good game is learning to define how winning or losing a dice roll translates in to events in your story. Describe the outcome, not the dice roll. 
If the player loses the roll then you get to decide what happens. Problems can arise if you declare an outcome that blocks play. 

Dice Rule 4: Dice are used to determine who tells the story 
Dice are rolled to determine who gets to say what is happening in the story: 
On winning a skill roll, the player gets to say what hap­pens next. What the player can say has already been agreed with the Keeper when the goal was set. If you feel that the player is overstepping the mark (going far beyond the stated goal) you may veto the player’s comments, perhaps calling for a subsequent dice roll. 
If the player loses a dice roll, you have free rein to de­scribe any outcome you wish. Usually this will mean that the player’s goal is not realized; however, you are not con­strained to presenting the opposite of the player’s goal—the player’s goal could be fully or partially achieved along with a consequence. The Keeper’s job is to create an interesting outcome, preferably one that develops the theme of horror in the story. 

One way to think of this is to compare it to a football game in which the two teams battle for possession of the ball. In Call of Cthulhu the player and Keeper battle for “pos­session” of the story. The side that wins the dice roll gets to run with the metaphorical ball for a while. 
Dice Rule 5: Avoid consecutive rolls against the same skill 
Asking a player to make a skill roll more than once for the same task greatly reduces the likelihood of the player winning the roll. An investigator with a Stealth skill of 50% obviously has a 50% chance of winning (at Regular diffi­culty level). If the player is asked to make this roll twice in succession, the chance of passing both rolls drops to 25%. Therefore, if there are three guard posts and each must be passed to enter the cult base, rather than asking for three consecutive Stealth rolls, you could call for one roll to cover all three, allowing the one winning roll to stand so that no further rolls will be required for a time. If you feel that there being three guard posts makes the task significantly harder then you can raise the difficulty level. 
Dice Rule 6: Roll dice in full view 
Both players and Keeper should roll the dice in full view and use the result as rolled. If you find that dice rolls bring unwanted consequences, you should read through Dice Rules 1 to 4 again. The only exception to this is when the Keeper is making a “concealed roll”, such as for Psychology rolls (see Contacts page @@). 
Setting Difficulty Levels 
The difficulty level of a given task should be the same for everyone and should not be altered according to the skill of the person attempting it. If the difficulty level for a climb is declared as being Hard it remains Hard regardless of wheth­er one is a novice or an expert climber. The skill percentage is what makes the difference; the person with the greater Climb skill has a greater chance of winning the roll. 
If you feel that a task is so easy that it would be routine you can either not call for a roll (the task is simply accom­plished) or you may ask for a roll at Regular difficulty (or give a Bonus die), but make the consequence of failure be very mild. 
A routine task that relates directly to an investigator’s occupation should be achieved automatically; remember, only roll dice for important and dramatic reasons. 



Ask the Player 
Ask questions of the players. Encourage the players to talk in terms of their investigators’ actions rather than using rules terminology. When a player proposes an action by asking to make a roll, ask questions about what the investigator is actually doing. It’s the Keeper’s job to ask the player to make a roll. Asking to make a roll does not convey the drama of the situation. 
Encourage the players to describe the way in which their goals are achieved when they win the roll. Think of it as shining a spotlight on the player and placing a microphone under his or her nose. Don’t be unnecessarily restrictive when it comes to what you allow a player to narrate. With a goal of “breaking the door down,” does it really matter whether the player describes it as, “I force the door with my shoulder until the latch pops off,” or “I charge the door, smashing it asunder, sending splinters of wood flying across the room?” If it’s a matter of inconsequential details and the player has enjoyed describing his or her investigator’s actions, just smile and say, “Yes!” Try to avoid restating or rephrasing what the player just said—doing so is unneces­sarily and may undermine the player’s contribution. 
Some players may roll the dice and look at you to tell them what happens: “I rolled 14 to break down the door. That’s a success. What happens?” Throw the question back and encourage the player to elaborate.“Cool, tell us how you do it”. 
Some players may go to the other extreme and describe everything that happens, including non-player characters’ reactions and more. How far you allow the player to go when it comes to describing how their goal is achieved is up to you. You have veto if the player goes too far, and you will develop a feel for what “too far” means. 
Learn to differentiate between descriptive color and mechanical effect. How the player describes breaking down the door isn’t really important—it’s just color. The dice were rolled, the goal was achieved, and the door is broken down. From another point of view, this descriptive color is of utmost importance, as it is this description that builds the story and makes the game more interesting and fun. 

There is only a mechanical effect on the game when the player goes beyond color and adds something that will affect future dice rolls. This is where you need to use your judgment on whether to accept, veto, or adapt the player’s description. If what the player asks for or describes seems reasonable, you can allow it, but don’t make life too easy for the player—remember that this is a horror game. 
If what the player asks for or describes seems unreason­able, you can veto it, but where possible try to adapt it or offer an alternative rather than blocking the player’s suggestion. If you feel unsure whether to allow it or not, you can ask for a Luck roll. 
Pushing the Roll—Pushing the Horror 
Sometimes, a player will simply ask, “Can I push that?” Remember the advice—ask questions of the players. Players must always describe the extra effort or action their inves­tigators make to justify a pushed roll—if it sounds insuf­ficient then suggest what more might be done. A pushed roll should usually be possible, but events in the story must account for it. 
When a player loses a pushed roll, he or she is giving you, the Keeper, license to make the investigators’ lives more difficult. You should think of a consequence that takes the investigators one step nearer to their doom. It may be some unexpected occurrence, perhaps even one that is unrelated to the subject of the skill roll. 


The consequence should be more than failure. Every Alternatively, if the investigator is insane at the time of time a player loses a pushed roll, you should try to steer the losing the pushed roll then this presents a prime opportuni­game towards the theme of horror. This may not always ty to introduce a delusion: 
be possible, but have that as your goal: a pushed roll is your chance to push the horror. 



Verbal Conflicts 
Verbal confrontations should be roleplayed at the table with much gusto and performance. However, when there’s a genuine conflict, you will want to pick up the dice. See 

Delusions can cause investigators to act irrationally. 


Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate, and Persuade skills: setting the difficulty level (page @@) for further details. 
You must decide when a non-player character can be co­erced and when they cannot. It might require a pretty face, a threat, a bribe, and so on, but most people can be won over with the right approach. Even the most evil of cultists might be conned or succumb to threats or persuasion if the players somehow find the non-player character’s weakness. Always work within the confines of the story—the cult boss would not knowingly be persuaded of anything by someone who is clearly an enemy, but if the investigator inveigles their way in to the cult, they might stand a chance. 
Violence and Sanity Rolls 
Intimidation may use threats of physical violence. One suggested consequence of losing a pushed Intimidation roll is to have the investigator unintentionally carry out his or her threat. The player may not want to shoot the non-player character in the kneecap, but pushing the roll can result in unwanted outcomes. The use of such violence in that situ­ation would constitute torture, and the Keeper may wish to ask for Sanity rolls for the participating investigators. 
Taking a life in a game is easy—we grew up doing it in make-up games as children, we do it in video games, we watch it on television, and so on. Actually doing it in real life is a whole other matter. You may wish to reflect this in your game by calling for a Sanity roll (SAN 0/1D6) when an investigator first kills a person, whether or not it is in cold blood. 
Cold blooded murder is especially difficult, and an in­vestigator may find themselves incapable of doing it. Such callous behavior may require the player to fail a Sanity roll before they are able to pull the trigger on a fellow human being. There is, after all, a word for people who can carry out such acts without flinching—psychopaths. A psychopath would have a low Sanity and thus be able to do such acts without their conscience stepping in to prevent them. 
Pacing the Game 
Your role is like that of an orchestra conductor: you set the tempo. Giving a good pace to the game can be essential, keeping everyone interested and excited. Some scenes have a natural end and the game progresses organically; others have the risk of becoming overextended and dull. Try to keep things moving, but bear in mind that sometimes the players need a chance to catch their breath and review the situation. Combats and chases demand fast-paced action and quick decisions from yourself and the players. Some­times the players may disagree about how to proceed. When two players get caught up in a discussion about whether to stay in the musty old cellar or to make a break for freedom, you can take a step back and give them time to talk and work things out. If the players are animated you can take that as a sure sign that they are enjoying the game. If players are argu­ing about rules then you should offer arbitration; otherwise just sit back and rest your voice for a while. 
Flying polyps are very dangerous Mythos beings. 
If everyone is enjoying themselves, there’s no problem; however, if some players are getting bored or the discussion is becoming repetitive, you should move things on. Do what you can to introduce some drama and push the players towards some form of action. For example, have a desperate non-player character call upon the investigators for aid. An­other option is to discuss the likelihood of success of their various plans. Alternatively, if they are completely stuck or cannot agree on how to proceed, you can offer them an Idea roll (see page @@). 
A key aspect of your job as Keeper is to build an atmo­sphere of tension, and the way you pace the game is key to this. You may start with a low-key opening and take a slow­boil approach, gradually building the tension as the game reaches a climax. Alternatively you may kick the game off with a bang, starting the story in media res, guns blazing, then alternate between tense dramatic scenes and high-ac­tion scenes. Keep your finger on the pulse of the game, allowing it to slow down at times, but always be ready to draw a scene to a close and push the game on. 
A one-off game should have a beginning, a middle, and an end, with escalating tension throughout. If the game is being run across multiple sessions, a different structure is required. Rather than building to an ending, the Keeper should have next session in mind. Try to end each session on a cliffhanger or some kind of revelation. Leave the players with an unanswered question. The realization that things are about to take a turn for the worse or the investigators are in much deeper than they first thought can be a real driver. If none of these things are available for the session climax, then a blood-pumping combat scene or chase can provide a great ending. 
The majority of roleplaying games are based upon acqui­sition of skills and stuff, whereas Call of Cthulhu is a game of attrition. Be mindful when pacing or planning sessions that the effect of the horror genre on characters is different from that of a standard fantasy adventure game. In the latter the characters may be fighters and wizards exploring dungeons, accruing experience, wealth, and power as they do so. They may risk life and limb with every fight, but they soon recover and grow more effective as the game progresses. Contrast this with characters in a horror story, who rarely increase in effectiveness and for whom each challenge chips away at their physical and mental resources, with injuries taking consider­able time to heal. A low-level monster may cease to be the threat that it was for experienced characters in some other games, but a low-level monster in Call of Cthulhu remains a threat no matter how experienced an investigator becomes. 
Take note of how your players react to events in the game. If they are blasé about the dangers their investigators face then increase the threat level. If the reverse is true and they are cautious about every minor action, so suspicious that they never accept a drink from a non-player character or spend ages planning for every eventuality, this may be a product of previous gaming experiences in which the games moderator was overly harsh. If this is the case, you should ease off a little or reassure them when the risks they are taking are reasonable. 
Problems With Players 
Solving all potential problems between players is beyond the scope of this book. As Keeper, you are responsible for more of the game than an individual player, however you should not feel that everything is your responsibility. Whether a game goes well or not is down to your whole gaming group, not just you. If problems arise then be ready to stop and talk to your players if you feel the need to do so. 
If you feel that one person is dominating the game, encourage the quieter players to participate. Imagine your players are actors on the stage and you are in control of the spotlight; by addressing questions to different players you are shifting the light from one player to another. 
One investigator can’t be present in more than one place at one time, though some players will attempt to have their investigator be omnipresent. If this is an issue then be clear about where investigators are—you may even consider using a map and counters to clearly illustrate investigator location. If one player’s counter is in the kitchen and anoth­er is in the attic, then when dealing with the investigator in the attic you shine the spotlight on and speak to that player only—remind the other player of the situation if he or she attempts to butt in. 
Handling a group of people is an important skill for a Keeper to learn. Hopefully everyone is enthusiastic and full of ideas, but if they all speak over each other you will have chaos. Focus is the answer. Focus your attention on only the players who are in the present scene and ask the other players to be patient. Remember you can cut from one scene to another whenever you want, but you must take control of this and be aware that you are doing it. 

If the investigators have split up, be clear about which investigators are at the present scene. Resolve the scene or bring it to an interesting point, perhaps at a moment of great conflict, then cut to the other investigators and do the same for them. Don’t leave any single player inactive for too long. Consider the structure of television drama and place yourself in the role of director; you get to call “action” and “cut”. 
Usually you will have multiple investigators in a given scene. Talk to the players who are involved in the scene and ask questions about what each investigator is doing. Do not allow a player to dictate the actions of another player’s investigator. If one player states that another player’s investigator is doing something, turn to the player of that other investigator and ask them what they are doing. Remember that not everything relies on consensus. If an investigator is holding a grenade and the player states, “I’m pulling the pin,” then it is pulled regardless of what the other players might say. A player might attempt to interfere in the activity of another investigator through the actions of their own investigator, but one player cannot declare the actions of another player’s investigator. 
Running With What the Players Throw at You 
Your players may well take an approach to the story that you have not thought of or planned for. Many Keepers will be tempted to block the players’ progress, simply saying no and steering the players back towards the story that the Keeper has prepared. Instead of that, where possible, try to incor­porate the players’ suggestions, especially if you can add complications of your own to their contribution. Wherever possible you should try to have an attitude of “Yes, and…” or “Yes, but…” rather than a flat “No”. 

The Idea Roll 
The players’ perception of the game world is formed by what you tell them; they cannot perceive what is in your head, only what you say. The players’ next step in a game may seem obvious to you but elude the players themselves. You should seek a balance between spoon-feeding clues to the players and being overly secretive; this may sound easy, but it is not. Invariably the players will misinterpret or simply forget clues that are required for the game to progress. It may be that as your story unfolds you are unable to provide a certain important clue to the players. This may cause the game to stall and the fear of this happening can be a source of anxiety among Keepers and players alike. A dice roll to allow the investigator to gain a clue is all very well, but what if the players lose the roll? Do you just ask them to make another roll and another until they succeed? 
This is where the Idea roll comes in. The players will get the clue regardless of whether they pass the Idea roll or not. An Idea roll is a highly significant and unusual event in the game. The roll determines not if, but how they get the clue. 
The goal of an Idea roll is always “to get the investigation back on track”. The Keeper starts by figuring out which was the most important clue the players missed and uses this to set a difficulty level for the Idea roll as follows. One player (whose investigator has the highest INT) then rolls dice for the Idea roll: 
If the Keeper never mentioned the clue, the difficulty level is Regular (requiring the player to roll equal to or less than their investigator’s INT). The likelihood of winning this roll is high—it is hardly fair to expect the players to act on something that they don’t know about. 
If the clue was definitely mentioned (but not empha­sized), the difficulty level of the Idea roll is Hard. The players have had the chance to pick up on this clue and missed it. If weeks of real world time have passed since the clue was mentioned, you might want to use Regular difficulty level for this. This is the default difficulty level for an Idea roll. 
If the clue was made clear by the Keeper (i.e. mentioned several times) or the players discussed it themselves, the difficulty level of the Idea roll is Extreme. 
The setting of difficulty levels for Idea rolls may appear counterintuitive; the more obvious a clue was made, the more difficult the Idea roll is. The Keeper is not trying to figure out the likelihood of the investigators realizing the clue—this is something they are incapable of, as fictional characters. The Keeper is offering the players a gamble, ask­ing them to risk the negative consequences to gain the clue. A part of the role of players is to take note of clues during the game. There is a balance between the Keeper giving clues out and the players taking clues in. The Idea roll aims to reflect this balance. If the clue has never been mentioned, the balance must be redressed in the players’ favor and this is achieved by giving the players a strong chance of getting the clue for free. If the clue has been made obvious but some­how missed by the players, the players have had their chance and so they are owed no redress, and thus the Idea roll is set to Extreme difficulty level. 
Winning the Idea Roll 
If the players win the Idea roll, the Keeper should deliver the clue. The information should be enough to get the story going again with a strong direction. The Keeper should weave the delivery of the “idea” into the story rather than simply giving out the information. If the clue was never mentioned at all, some creativity is required in how the players attain the clue. 
When an Idea roll is made, the Keeper has complete control of the situation and can move time on or place the investigators in whatever situation is judged appropriate; however, you should not increase their level of danger as the result of a winning roll. 

Losing the Idea Roll—In the Thick of It 
If the players lose the Idea roll they find themselves in deep trouble. A lost Idea roll gives the Keeper permission to put any of the investigators (regardless of who rolled dice) in the “thick of things.” The Keeper should consider the clue on offer and try to come up with the worst situation in which the investigators might realize it. The Keeper starts the game again in media res and the players must deal with the situa­tion in which they find themselves. 

You may well find that your group never resorts to using the Idea roll. Indeed, you may find that your group is never at a loose end and always have some ideas of their own as to how the story might proceed. Alternatively, the players may get stuck, but be so cautious that they refuse to call for an Idea roll. If this is the case, you can draw the current chapter of the game to a close and carry out investigator develop­ment phase (rolling skill improvement and so on). Then ask the players what their likely courses of action might now be. If you feel the players lack direction, you should insist on starting the next part of the game with an Idea roll, using it to determine whether things restart well for the investiga­tors or not. 
Luck for Non-Player Characters 
If you decide ahead of time that the players will meet the arch-villain in a warehouse, and that the investigators will neither catch nor kill him, then you have already scripted the events and the players will be no more than pawns in your story. Remember, Call of Cthulhu centers on a shared story created by both the Keeper and the players. Avoid predetermining events in which the players will be involved. 
However, let us assume you want to do your best to keep the arch-villain alive or out of the investigators’ hands. One way to achieve this outcome is to give the arch-villain a Luck pool—this does not guarantee escape, but it greatly increases the villain’s effectiveness and improves the chances of any escapes performed within the rules (see Spending Luck, page @@). 
If you have an important non-player character (especial­ly in a campaign) who is likely to crop up numerous times, then you may provide that non-player character with a Luck pool equal to his or her POW. This can be spent to affect dice rolls, but the pool is not replenished—thus it might be used to cause mayhem and allow an escape, although eventually the non-player character’s luck will run dry. 

One of the reasons for restricting the use of Luck for non-player characters is that many non-player characters will only appear once, and thus could easily spend all their luck there and then, making them very powerful during the short time that they are in play. Non-player characters who appear multiple times will have a reason to reserve their Luck. 
Disseminating Information 
Expect the players to investigate and ask questions. That statement may sound obvious; however, these investigations will lead the players to ask questions regarding matters you have not considered. If there has been a murder, for exam­ple, you need to have a clear vision of what has occurred at the scene. You also need to decide how the murder took place. A player may ask if there are muddy footprints on the study carpet, whether there are any witnesses, or if the murder weapon has been thrown in the trash. If you have a good grasp of how events unfolded, you can provide a reliable answer, even to unanticipated questions. You may not have considered a certain detail previously and hence don’t instantly know if there is mud on the study carpet, for example. Since you know how the murder took place, you will know if intruders broke in through the study window (which you can decide has a flowerbed outside), in which case there is indeed mud on the carpet! 
When disseminating information, try to restrict yourself to describing evidence as found and leave it up to the players to deduce what has happened. You might inform the players that there was mud on the carpet, but avoid explaining the reason for it. 
Leaving areas of doubt and uncertainty is essential to promoting a sense of intrigue among the players. Fear finds fertile ground in ignorance, uncertainty, and doubt. Just tell the players what their investigators perceive and let the players make their own deductions. 
The investigators shoot a monster. Avoid saying, “It’s dead”. Simply inform the players that they cannot perceive any signs of life. Now the players are uncertain—is the thing dead or alive? A First Aid or Medicine roll will determine whether a person is alive or dead for certain. 
The investigators search a room and fail their Spot Hid­den roll.Avoid saying, “There’s nothing there”. Tell the players they have not found anything. Now they are wondering if they missed something. Pushing the Spot Hidden roll would allow them to know if they have missed a clue or not. 
The players will think of avenues of investigation that will surprise you. Be creative and try to incorporate their ideas and allow leads to manifest wherever it makes sense for them to do so. A player may think to look through the bookshelves of the study for a family tree; the text of the scenario may not list the presence of a family tree, but such a thing might be quite feasible, so reward this idea and build on it. Remember the principle of “Yes, and…” and “Yes, but…”. 

Yes, and…: The family tree is inscribed inside a family bible along with some other useful hints. 
Yes, but…: You don’t want the players to discover the clue so easily, in which case, rather than simply not finding a family tree on the shelves, perhaps the investigator finds the family bible from which the first few pages have been torn out or certain names erased. 
Either of these options foster further investigation and are preferable to the simple blocking statement, “No, you can’t find a family tree.” 
Perception Rolls 
There are three main perception skills in Call of Cthulhu: 
• 
Spot Hidden: Chiefly visual observation, though it can also be used for smell or taste. 

• 
Listen: Perceiving and identifying sounds. 

• 
Psychology: Understanding the motivations and inten­tions of another person. 


If a player succeeds in a roll for a perception skill, some information pertinent to the scenario should be forthcom­ing (referred to as a clue). 
The Keeper will usually be the one to ask for perception rolls, however sometimes a player may request one if his or her investigator is actively searching for a clue, for example exploring a room (Spot Hidden) or attempting to determine if someone is lying (Psychology). 
Avoid having a single concealed clue that is the key to the whole adventure—despite the Keeper’s best efforts, the players could miss it, especially in a scenario in which the location of the key clue may be bypassed. A variety of strategies exist. You can ensure that important information is accessible in several ways. The information need not be precisely the same or appear in the same manner; however, it should be enough to point the investigators in the right direction. If ultimately they do miss the clue, don’t worry— you always have the Idea roll (see page @@) to fall back on. 
Clues are divided in to two categories: obvious clues and obscure clues. You decide which prior to the dice being rolled. 
Obvious Clues 
If you have something you want the players to find out about, you should make the clue obvious. Obvious clues are useful if your game is plot-driven, especially when missing such a clue would leave the players at a loss for how to pro­ceed. The players are not required to roll dice to uncover obvious clues. 
There may be obvious clues and obscured clues at the same location. It might be obvious that a book has been moved by the dust marks on the desk, but the single blonde hair lying in the dust might go unnoticed. The first piece of information—that the book was moved—is an obvious clue, while the blonde hair is an obscured clue. 
If the clue is likely to be perceived by just one player among the group, it is up to you who you give it to; perhaps the player who has been least actively involved in the game, or the player of the investigator with the highest Spot Hidden score. 
The main goal for investigators is to find out what is happening. 

Obscured Clues 
Finding an obscured clue may help the investigators in some way, but is not pivotal to progressing the plot. If you feel that either option, getting the clue or not getting the clue, would allow the game to proceed in an interesting direction, you can use an obscured clue. When the players request a perception roll, you should generally use an obscured clue. 
Obscured clues serve two functions: 
• 
The chance to gain a helpful clue. 

• 
To create tension when the players miss the roll and know they have missed a clue. 


Resolving a Perception Roll For an Obscured Clue 
Each investigator that could potentially perceive the clue should make a perception roll (Spot Hidden, Psychology, Listen, or a combination thereof). Decide on a difficulty level and declare it before the players roll. The information is given to the player with the highest level of success that meets or exceeds the difficulty level. In the case of a tie, the clue is perceived simultaneously by multiple investigators or by the investigator with the highest skill (Keeper’s choice). 
Obscured perception rolls, when lost, have a second function—to provide a clear sign to the players that the investigators have missed a clue. Note that there is a dis­sonance here between player knowledge and investigator knowledge. The players know for certain there is a clue that has been missed, but the investigators should be unaware of anything they failed to perceive. The players now have three options, and which they choose is a matter of personal preference and style of play: 
Ignore it: Play strictly within the bounds of the investiga­tor’s knowledge. 
Push it: Have an investigator act on a hunch and take action that justifies a pushed perception roll, actively using percep­tion skills in an attempt to get the clue. 
Act on it: The player may pre-emptively guess what the clue is and act on it, rather than risk the consequences of losing a pushed perception roll. Of course they may have leapt to the wrong conclusion. 

Consequences of Losing a Pushed Perception Roll 
Regardless of who called for the perception roll and why, the player may push the roll if it can be justified through the investigator’s actions. Perception rolls may be used in many different situations and there are many different potential consequences of losing a pushed roll. 
Here are a few ideas of what may go wrong when losing a pushed perception roll: i The investigators waste time searching and in that time enemies arrive. 
i Evidence of a search is left; items are broken or are replaced out of order. 
i A foe creeps up to ambush the investigator while he or she is searching. 
i The investigator causes offense or suspicion by studying the target too closely. 
i That thing you were listening for? It heard you and it is coming! 


Using More Than One Perception Skill 
Which skill to use for perception can be open to question, depending on the situation. If a non-player character is about to draw a weapon to attack an investigator, the player might make a Spot Hidden roll to see the weapon being drawn or a Psychology roll to become aware of the non-player char­acter’s intention. In this case, allow the player to make one dice roll using the higher of the investigator’s two skills (see Combined skill rolls, page @@). 

Player Goals For Perception Rolls 
Usually the goal for a perception roll is simply “to find a clue”; however, a player may create a more specific goal, such as “I want to search the room. I’m hoping to find a diary or journal that will give some information regarding the whereabouts of the person we’re looking for.” If you are happy that such a book could be found in the room, accept the goal and allow the player to roll the dice. If not, modify the goal accordingly or apply the “nothing there” technique outlined below. 
Nothing There? 
Don’t be tempted to call for Perception rolls when there is nothing to find. Remember that the default goal of a Per­ception roll is always “to find a clue”—if there is no clue to find then there is no roll to be made. The clue, whatever it is, should be notable, something that adds an interesting new twist or aspect to the story. 
If a player requests a Spot Hidden roll, you may allow one even if there is no clue present. The goal should be phrased as “to look for a clue” or if looking for a specific item, perhaps “to look for Jefferson’s journal”, for example. If the goal is achieved, the player will discover that the clue or item is definitely not present at the scene. 
Psychology 
If a player passes a Psychology roll, the truth should be revealed. If the roll is lost, you may be tempted to deceive the player, but if you automatically do this every time, the player (who knows because they lost the dice roll) will know that the opposite is true! Therefore, rather than feeling compelled to inform the player of the opposite of what is true, you are free to tell the player whatever you like—the difference being that the player won’t know if the informa­tion is reliable. 

Handouts 
Player handouts are a common feature of Call of Cthulhu games. These are usually given to the players when their investigators have found some important information, such as a letter or excerpt from a book. Published scenarios often reprint (or make available online) such handouts, allowing Keepers to print or cut them out for use in the game. 
For example, a handwritten letter from an anonymous informer, a map showing the location of the tomb of an ancient wizard, or a newspaper article detailing sightings of the Sasquatch could each be presented to the players as handouts. 
Handouts serve several functions. One is sensory; a lovingly crafted handout helps to boost the sense of im­mersion in the story. Another is information. A handout is a convenient way to give out clues and information that can be retained by the players for later reference. A handout can also shift the focus from you and onto the person you hand it to. If the handout is for everyone then encourage the player to read it aloud. 
Some Keepers prefer to create their handouts from scratch, whether for a published or a home-brew scenario. These can be works of art in themselves. Simple techniques can be used to great effect, such as writing letters with a fountain pen, or using an old, worn notebook, wherein the Keeper has prepared suitable pages. Coffee can be used to stain the paper to give a timeworn effect. A piece of clothing from a charity shop (like a glove or torn shirt) can be em­bellished with fake blood so that the Keeper can present it to the players when their investigators are searching the scene of some dark activity. 
Photographs of the period in which the scenario is set can be useful in showing locations and people. Postcards from antique fairs might also be used. 
If the setting is more modern, the Keeper might prepare a sound file to be played when a recorded message is discov­ered, or perhaps a short video appropriate to the scenario. The possibilities are endless; whole “dummy” websites could be created for the purpose of a specific investigation. 
Whether you have time to create such handouts from scratch, go searching for them or simply use the ones pro­vided in published scenarios, the use of handouts greatly complements the game. Have fun and see what you can come up with. 
Listen to what the players say and how they respond. If they are excited when you bring out a floor plan with count­ers or miniatures to map the action then do it more often. If they study every detail of each handout then use more of them. Usually you’ll have a mix of players and they will respond to a mix of approaches. Don’t sweat it; keep things in balance and just try to make a good game. 
Using the Rules 
The rules in this book are intended to be flexible enough to 
cope with every eventuality. 
The rules, in brief, are: 
Regardless of the situation, the player’s intention defines the goal, and a skill or characteristic is chosen that best suits the situation. 
If the situation is reliant upon on external circumstances rather than an investigator’s actions then a Luck roll is used. 
A Guide to Using the Rules for Specific Situations 
Here are some examples of goals and how a Keeper might use the rules to resolve them. These are not spot rules and are only provided as suggestions to help Keepers understand how skill rolls can be used with a variety of goals. 
Winning at a casino: 
Most games at a casino are based on luck; however, the odds are always stacked in favor of the house, so a straight Luck roll would be generous. Perhaps this is one situation in which you could ask for a roll against half the investigator’s Luck score. A custom rule might be appropriate if you want to simulate the feeling of gambling. You might decide to call for three Luck rolls over the course of the evening at the casino and set out the possible outcomes before rolling. Let the player nominate the stakes they are risking. If the player wins all three Luck rolls, he or she wins big, multiplying the stake by ten. If two out of three are achieved, the player wins a little. If one is achieved, the player breaks even. If all three are lost, the player ends up deep in debt. 
Ambushing an opponent: 
The investigator wants to gain concealment and attack with an advantage. If the investigator makes a winning Stealth skill roll (opposed by the enemy’s Spot Hidden skill) you might grant a bonus die to the player’s first attack, or simply allow an automatic success. 
Swimming to safety (drowning): 
An investigator has fallen into turbulent water and must swim to safety or drown. The Keeper calls for a swim roll with the goal “swim to safety.” If the player loses, then no progress is made and water may be inhaled; the player must make a CON roll or his or her investigator will suffer 1D6 damage per round (see Other forms of damage page @@). The situation demands a pushed roll—the only alternative is the investigator gives up and drowns. If the player misses the pushed swim roll, the investigator is battered and half­drowned, taking 1D6 damage per round. The Keeper must then make an important decision: either the investigator’s life is put on the line or the investigator is washed up later elsewhere. If the Keeper chooses the former, then the in­vestigator will continue to lose hit points each round until saved by another investigator or non-player character. Alter­natively, if no one else is around, the Keeper could waive the drowning damage and instead have the unsuccessful pushed roll mean that the investigator has washed up on some for­eign shore, bereft of all possessions and in a bad way. 

Strangling an enemy: 
First the attacker would use a Fighting Maneuver with the aim of “seizing my victim in a stranglehold”. The standard combat rules accommodate this. After completing the ma­neuver, on each successive round the attacker (who is now acting with one bonus die as a result of the successful fight­ing maneuver) may strangle the target using the Fighting skill to make attacks as normal; any damage is narrated as strangulation. Note how this uses standard combat rules. 
House Rules 
If you wish to create a custom or house rule for specific circumstances, think carefully before doing so. 
Are you sure that what you want to do would not be handled equally well using the standard rules? Is a custom rule going to add significantly to the game? 
The game includes specific rules for combat, chases, magic, luck, sanity, and physical harm. Everything else is handled with skill rolls. For example, no specific rules are in­cluded for how long a person can survive without food and water or how long it takes to hack in to a computer network. These things can be decided by the Keeper as appropriate to the current scenario, using the standard rules and personal judgment. However, if one of these is a key element in a particular scenario, then it might be appropriate to come up with custom rules that specifically focus on that aspect. 
When making a custom rule, try to keep it simple—focus on one skill or a limited number of skills (or characteristics) and decide on a method of tracking degrees of success. Try to build in meaningful decisions that can be taken by the players; such things might alter the difficulty level or change which skill is used. 

Of course, the rulebook could attempt to list a specific rule for every eventuality, but this leads to a game in which the rules must constantly be referred to and in which every­one is restrained by a rule on every action. Call of Cthulhu is designed to be flexible and to encourage the Keeper to make creative use of the core rule: the skill roll. 
Characteristic Rolls 
The standard rules present a method of generating charac­teristics and creating an investigator. A variety of alternative approaches are presented in Chapter 3: Creating investi­gators. Players expect consistency. If you allow one player to re-roll or juggle characteristics, you should be up front about it and apply the same approach for all players. 
Action Scenes 
Scenes involving multiple investigators, non-player char­acters and/or monsters can become confusing, especially when trying to figure out who is doing what and when. To maintain control, you should quickly establish a list of investigators and non-player characters in DEX order. Start with the highest DEX (at the top of the list) and resolve that character’s action, then work down the list in turn. The round is over when everyone has had their turn; go back to the top of the list and start over until the situation or scene is resolved. 
Some actions take longer to perform than others. Some­times the rules define how long it may take to perform a particular action, such as with combat attacks and spells, but for other actions you will have to make a judgment. 

“But That’s How it Works in Reality” 
When using your judgment over what might happen in the game, try to balance a sense of reality with what you think will create a dramatic situation—if it’s clear that being a slave to verisimilitude is going to produce a dull outcome then try being more creative. This is not to imply that you should strive to be unrealistic; however, if you find yourself justifying a universally undesirable event with the phrase, “But that’s how it works in reality,” you should ask yourself if you couldn’t do something more dramatically creative. A shotgun blast, for example, may not send a person flying back through the air in reality, but if you like the idea of it doing so then where’s the harm? 
Movement 
All distances are approximate and based on narrative de­scription, so accurate measurement will rarely be an issue. Should you wish to gauge distances then, as a rough guide, a character can cautiously travel one meter or yard per move­ment point (MOV) in one combat round; thus an average human can travel 8 meter in one combat round. If sprinting, a character might cover five times that distance, but would soon tire. 
Hit Points and Physical Injury for Non-Player Characters 
You should use the standard damage rules for non-player characters. However, non-player characters are under your control. If you decide that a non-player character has a heart attack and drops dead on the spot then that is what happens, so it follows that if an investigator punches a non-player character, and you decide that the non-player character drops dead as a result of the attack, then that is what happens. You don’t even have to ask for a roll to hit or a damage roll on a non-player character if you do not wish to. If an investigator has a non-player character at his or her mercy (perhaps a knife held to their throat) and states that he or she is killing the non-player character then allow this to happen without using dice if you wish. This would of course be exceptional; however, it illustrates the point that you are only compelled to apply the rules when they directly affect an investigator. You can have a ceiling fall and crush a non-player character without a roll, but an investigator will always get a dice roll—in this case, perhaps to dodge falling masonry or to notice the loose ceiling before it falls. 
Players may assess a non-player character’s injuries by tracking the damage they inflict or simply by what the inves­tigators perceive, although these may not be wholly reliable, as a non-player character might have magical defense or may only be pretending to be injured. When a successful First Aid or Medicine roll is performed on a non-player character, you should indicate to the player whether the non-player character is dying, dead or alive. 
The investigators may reduce an enemy to unconscious­ness—a condition from which the enemy will most likely recover, given time. This may provide a moral dilemma—do the investigators allow an evil cultist to live or do they carry out a summary execution? In most cases, cold-blooded murder should incur a Sanity roll. 
Chases 
The task of describing a location is usually part of the Keep­er’s role; in a chase, however, when the player wins a Luck roll, he or she is encouraged to do so. Some players may be hesitant to do this, in which case you should ask leading questions and encourage the player to elaborate. 



Presenting the Terrors of the Mythos 
In Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods, each mon­ster has a description (usually taken directly from a Mythos story). These are a great place to start, but you should try to build upon these and vary your descriptions so that recur­ring monsters do not become mundane. 
Using images to present the horrors of the Cthulhu Mythos can be problematic. While the Internet and books can sometimes provide approximations of some of the monsters of the Mythos, they are not always ideal, and sometimes detract from the sense of horror that you as Keeper are trying to portray. Likewise, popping a miniature figure of an elder thing on to the gaming table is more likely to have the effect of breaking any tension you have built thus far (such miniatures can be useful later on, once you have fully set the scene and engaged the players with a sense of dread or horror). 
As many film directors know, the motto “less is more” is a useful one to remember when presenting mind-blasting entities from beyond space and time. Try describing mon­sters vaguely, hinting at their otherworldliness and letting each player’s imagination fill in the blanks. 
Each time you present a monster, present it afresh. Make the description intense and visceral. A deep one is never just a deep one. It is always a creature from the depths of the sea and old as time itself, a creature whose very presence hits you deep in the gut, repelling mankind in a profound man­ner causing revulsion and nausea. Remember, it is never just a deep one. 

Playing Alien Entities 
Then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the disap­pearance of certain staples, and the jarringly comical heap of tin cans pried open in the most unlikely ways and at the most unlikely places. The profusion of scattered matches, intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor enigma—as did the two or three tent cloths and fur suits which we found lying about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due to clumsy efforts at unimaginable adaptations. —H.P. Lovecraft, At the Mountains of Madness 
Only the Keeper knows how the creatures of the Mythos should behave. Anything they do may be important. They are capable of influencing investigators in all sorts of ways. In too many games, monsters just turn up, growl or pipe in an eldritch tone and then attack. This presentation is limit­ing, predictable, and unworthy of the Mythos. 
Intelligent creatures build, experiment, worship, learn, perform magic, question, torture or do anything else hu­mans might do. They do much more as well; things that are odd, inexplicable, or incomprehensible. 
The horror, mystery and tone of the game are best served if behaviors are dark and unusual. The actions of such crea­tures are beyond the imagination and you should strive to portray them as sinister, threatening, and unwholesome. 
The easy identification of a monster takes away mystery and reveals details about the plot. Don’t let investigators get information for free. If they get closer to the thing, it is still not a deep one—it is a dark, wet shape, half-submerged, draped with seaweed, stinking like long-dead fish. 

Sometimes, a monster looks the same whether or not it is alive. Use caution when confirming kill.s 
When monsters die, it is up to you whether they exhibit symptoms of distress, simply collapse, or vanish. Mythos creatures that die often dissolve or evaporate—the nox­ious cloud soon replaced by a damp spot and clean air, as happened to Wilbur Whateley in Miskatonic University’s library in The Dunwich Horror. This conveniently leaves the investigators short of physical evidence. 
Descriptions need not be entirely visual and become more real if two or more senses can be employed, such as sight and smell. Did the monster leave a trail of noxious slime behind? Describe its texture. Does it expel disagreeable odors? Does it emit a strange, high-pitched wail as the slime dissolves? Don’t strain for effect or break off the narrative to try to come up with the right word, but keep in mind texture, smell, taste, and quality of light as possible factors. 
Smell is particularly evocative, perhaps because it can­not be communicated by second-hand stimuli such as pho­tographs, radio or television; we know a thing is physically present with us when we can smell it. Sometimes the mere proximity of a Mythos monster can make the hairs on the investigator’s neck stand up. 
The evidence that a creature leaves behind—pools, prints, fragments, flakes, etc.—or the damage it has done, provide a much more interesting way to lead to the deduc­tion of its identity or purpose. Sets of clues that add up to a baffling monster can make for fascinating play. 
Remember that nearly all Mythos races, such as mi-go, ser­pent men, and deep ones, are of human intelligence or higher, lead longer lives and are more knowledgeable of the world and cosmos around them. Who among these semi-immortals would willingly risk death for some momentary victory over beings who are to them the equivalent of chimpanzees? Lack­ing reasons to fight, intelligent creatures retreat before danger. Avoid negotiation between investigators and their inhuman adversaries—such actions suggest that the monsters operate on a human level and diminishes their horror. 
Shoggoths and other entities of lesser intelligence should be terrifyingly unpredictable and rancorous. Such creatures may well launch all-out attacks and can be terrible in their wrath. Here the challenge is physical and the Keeper is obliged only to give reasonable warning of impending doom. Attacking the shoggoth who lives in the cave can be an episodic problem, one that can be returned to until the investigators can destroy it—should they survive long enough—seal it in or somehow banish it elsewhere. 
Looking Away Won’t Save You! 
And as I watched the ripples that told of the writhing of 
worms beneath, I felt a new chill from afar out whither the 
condor had flown, as if my flesh had caught a horror before 
my eyes had seen it. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, What the Moon Brings. 
This quote illustrates how we perceive with all of our senses, not just our eyes. Given the alien nature of the Mythos, we might even perceive its presence through some primal sense beyond the known five that we recognize. Averting one’s eyes from the TV screen may shield us from the sight of unwanted scenes of horror, but this is rarely enough when confronted with the tangible, unspeakable presence of a Mythos monster. 
Winners and Losers 
Call of Cthulhu is not a competition between you and the players. The rules ensure that everyone is treated fairly; however, there is no mechanism to enforce game balance between the Keeper and the players. Balance is derived from the decisions that you make as Keeper. You decide what the investigators encounter, you set the scene, you decide on the actions of the non-player characters. 
The odds can easily be stacked against the players. There are no rules to limit what you can present the investigators with; if you decide that a host of dark young descend on the investigators while they are asleep, then there is little that the players can do to save their investigators. This would not make for a good game or happy players. You must measure the threat and be aware that many of the monsters presented in this book are capable of wiping out a party of investiga­tors. Usually, the best option open to the investigators is to flee and live to fight another day. 
Fair Warning 
Keepers should endeavor to provide players with the chance to avoid investigator death wherever possible. This is not to say that Keepers should diminish the abilities of monsters and villains in the game, or pull their punches when dealing out damage from attacks and other injuries. Rather, it is recommended that Keepers give players up to three chances to avoid certain death. 
Failed Sanity Rolls 
A sense of self-control is an essential quality of sanity. A non-player character may hold a gun to an investigator’s head and demand information regarding a missing segment of the R’lyeh Disk, but whether the investigator tells or ac­cepts a bullet in the head is up to the player. However, when a Sanity roll is failed, the investigator loses all self-control and may act in a way that is counter to his or her best interests. 



People who lose control may harm themselves or others, even loved ones, or act in some other way that is counter to how they would act when rational. To simulate this loss of self-control, the investigator is handed to you, the Keeper, for a short time—whenever a Sanity roll is failed you take control and dictate the investigator’s next action. As always, you should aim to drive the game towards the theme of horror and consider how an involuntary action could do this. For example, if the investigators are hiding under a bed when the cannibal cult arrive home, will one of them cry out upon missing a Sanity roll as a result of seeing the cultists preparing their lunch? 
If the Sanity roll results in insanity, the Keeper gains con­trol of the investigator’s actions for the duration of the bout of madness. This won’t be for long—in real time at least. Once the bout of madness is over, control of the investigator is handed back to the player. Note the difference between madness, which is of short duration, and the underlying in­sanity, which is longer—the Keeper controls the investigator during madness, the player controls during insanity. 
Players may take a cue from their investigator going insane to present their character as ‘mad’ all of the time—whilst they can portray their character however they wish, you may want to remind such players that being insane does not necessarily mean that the character acts out their madness all of the time. Indeed, whilst there is an underlying insanity, the investigator may act and function completely normally in everyday situ­ations, however if they suffer further Sanity point loss, then a bout of madness ensues and the character’s madness takes hold for the duration of the bout. 
Ultimately with the onset of permanent insanity (which equates with permanent madness) the player’s control of his or her investigator comes to an end. 
One way to think of Call of Cthulhu is as a struggle between player and Keeper for control of the investigator. The player takes the side of rational and sane behavior, while you, the Keeper, are like a little devil on the investigator’s shoulder, constantly pushing the investigator into situations that will lead to your gaining control, resulting in madness and irrational behavior. 
Delusions 
Delusions have greater impact if the delusion has some rel­evance to the investigator. A great way to do this is to keep track of each investigator’s backstory and use the entries as inspiration for delusions. A lone investigator might set out to explore some old house, only to meet an old friend there (from his or her backstory). The whole event may be a delusion taking place in the investigator’s home. 
A number of films offer good inspiration for how to use delusions and madness, among them Twelve Monkeys, Bug, The Shining, The Lovely Bones, Pan’s Labyrinth, Fight Club and Mulholland Drive. In these movies, characters struggle to differentiate between reality and hallucinations, and we, the viewer, are unsure if what we are seeing is real or imaginary. 

Scaring the Players 
“What would your feelings be, seriously, if your cat or your 
dog began to talk to you, and to dispute with you in human 
accents? You would be overwhelmed with horror. I am sure 
of it. And if the roses in your garden sang a weird song, you 
would go mad. And suppose the stones in the road began to 
swell and grow before your eyes, and if the pebble that you noticed at night had shot out stony blossoms in the morning?” —Arthur Machen, The White People 
The horror genre can be a lot of fun. Right down to pound­ing hearts and sweating brows, it is part of human nature to find pleasure in being scared, as long as being scared is not for real. Of course, actually scaring anyone is rare in a game consisting of dice and paper, but be assured it can happen. 
The game’s setting is ostensibly that of the real world with which we are intimately familiar. As you play, strive to make the world realistic so your players feel at home in it. If a monster appeared in real life, most of us would be scared, but a player is unlikely to be scared even if a monster enters through his or her investigator’s front door—the player knows this is a horror game, and is expecting monsters. In­stead of using a monster to scare a player, try to confound the player’s expectations of how things in the “real” world work. Consider the following event for example: the investigator says goodbye to his wife as she leaves the house for work, and then, five minutes later, his wife walks down the stairs in her dressing gown. Don’t provide an explanation. If you can induce cognitive dissonance (holding two conflicting ideas simultaneously) in the player, you will open the door to fear as the player’s mind struggles to make sense of the situation. We get scared when we can’t make sense of things, especially when those things that don’t make sense are the mundane, everyday things that we know we should understand. 
Pacing works hand-in-hand with confounding expec­tations to create a sense of escalating tension and terror. Present the players with problems and, when the player shows signs of coping with the problems, toss in an addi-tional complication. Look through your scenario, consider the problems that will arise for the investigators and be on the lookout for more as you play. 

Magic 
Magic is part of the Cthulhu Mythos and man can never fully comprehend it. Each spell has its own description listed in Chapter 12: Grimoire; however, spells are in the Keeper’s domain and therefore mutable. You are free to change any aspect of a spell as you wish. Consistency is antithetical to the horror genre—Lovecraft himself never constrained himself with it, so neither should you. Once a spell or mon­ster is established in a given story, you will probably want to keep it largely unchanged for the duration of that story, but this does not mean that in another story with different investigators the same monster or spell cannot manifest in a quite different way. 
As well as the danger associated with the first casting of a spell, you are encouraged to incorporate your own ideas for hazards in to the spells, perhaps to suit your scenario. 

Tomes 
You should note that the rules state that it is up to you when to call for rolls, and this applies equally to reading tomes and using magic. If reading the tome is essential to the progres­sion of your plot, then beware of introducing a dice roll and thus a risk of failure. 
Using the Optional Rule: Spontaneous use of the Cthulhu Mythos Skill 
Clearly, use of this option must be handled with care, as it can potentially place disproportionate power in the hands of a player. When an investigator has only 2% Cthulhu Mythos skill, the chances of successfully using spontaneous magic are very low. You may be tempted by this low proba­bility of success to allow an investigator a chance to achieve a major goal, such as raising the dead through spontaneous use Cthulhu Mythos skill. This may become an issue when that same investigator has 50% Cthulhu Mythos skill in the future; suddenly what was a rare chance becomes a fifty-fifty chance and the investigator is casually raising the dead on a daily basis. Only you can decide what is appropriate to your game, so take care not to allow overly generous goals simply because the present chance of success is very low. Opting to downscale an investigator’s abilities later will give the players a sense of being penalized and should be avoided by using some forethought. 
When setting goals for the use of Cthulhu Mythos skill, refer to a comparable spell for guidance on costs and re­quirements. Tell the player how many magic points it will cost when the goal is agreed, or perhaps state a die type 
(e.g. 1D8) that will be rolled to determine the magic point cost. Each spontaneous use of Cthulhu Mythos should be dangerous and unique; losing the pushed roll can have dire consequences (see The consequences of failing a pushed casting roll, page @@). 
You may decide to be more generous in the setting of goals for the use of the spontaneous Cthulhu Mythos skill if the goal is associated with the investigator’s profession. In this way a doctor could become a Herbert West style charac­ter—a mad doctor bent on the reanimation of dead tissue. 
Entering the World of the Cthulhu Mythos 
In creating atmosphere, the Keeper should play up the transition that the investigators go through when they come to realize the reality of the Mythos. For someone with no Cthulhu Mythos skill points or who disbelieves in it (see Becoming a believer, page @@), the world is a place of hope, a place where mankind has the potential to live in happiness, a place where the investigator can look forward to settling down, starting a family and enjoying a long and happy life. However, for those who take the irrevocable step and com­prehend the true nature of the universe, that optimistic light is extinguished forever. 
When one becomes a believer, the world changes and becomes a threatening and unpleasant place—people look strange and threatening, and the wind blows cold. There are no more tranquil places, only places of dread. The once great achievements of mankind are now seen as shallow mockeries. Where once cheery faces gathered to welcome the investigator, now there are only lurking figures whose eyes are filled with malice and resentment. Those with knowledge of the Mythos face a worse fate than most. As their sanity is drains away, the nightmares increase, until they perceive the horror even with their waking mind. When all sanity is gone, as their mind snaps, they hear it clearly, but for a moment:  the dreadful Call of Cthulhu. 
Ending a Story 
Everyone likes a good ending, but what constitutes a good ending? Consider films: some end with a bang (Star Wars), others end at a crucial point (The Italian Job) and some simply stop mid-flow (No Country for Old Men). 
Potentially, a game could continue on and on, but as Keeper you should know when the story comes to an end. Sometimes the ending is obvious, other times it is a matter of deciding when to say, “cut”. If the investigators defeat the big bad in a battle, this clearly presents one way to end the game. Other times an ending may not be so clear. 
If you’ve been playing for several hours and want to draw the session to a close, you have a couple of options. Ask the players if they want to continue the story another day. If so, try to bring the game to a cliffhanger or dramatic moment and then cease play. If people want to end the game then fast-forward to the final scene. An Idea roll (see page @@) may be useful here to decide whether the investigators begin the final scene in an advantageous position or not. Tell the players what they find out and where it takes them, and then kick off the final scene in media res. The movie Planet Terror 
(a.k.a. Grindhouse) illustrates this approach wonderfully: simulating the outdated problem of having a missing reel of film, the movie jumps to a later scene of carnage with the protagonists in the thick of the action. 
Investigator Death 
In some instances, death (even death of the whole investi­gator group) can be a dramatic and memorable outcome. But the death of an investigator knocks a player out of the game until such a time that a new investigator can be created and introduced to the story. Don’t be too ready to deal out death if other interesting options are possible. Endeavoring to make the game an enjoyable experience for everyone is far more important than being a slave to realism. 
Remember, this is a horror game, and the threat of both death and insanity should accompany the investigators’ ev­ery step. An investigator is controlled by a player and there are only two outcomes that permanently end this: death and permanent insanity. 
You may be tempted towards leniency when it comes to dealing out damage, but be mindful that in most cases accumulated damage leads to unconsciousness rather than death. Players are encouraged to form an attachment to their investigators and the death of an investigator should always be a significant event. Don’t be surprised if a player welcomes the death of an investigator, especially if the death is heroic, meaningful, or will simply make a great anecdote! 
Epilogues 
A short epilogue for each investigator is a nice way to wrap up the end of a story. A brief epilogue can be used to tell what becomes of each investigator in the aftermath of the story, and provides an opportunity to recognize every play­er’s contribution to the game. Go around the group and talk to each player in turn about the fate of their investigator. There’s no need for dice rolls, just a brief description of what the future holds. Try to make each epilogue suitably Lovecraftian and appropriate to your story. 



Creating Scenarios 
This section looks at the basic ingredients of a Call of Cthul­hu adventure, aiming to help you take your first steps in crafting scenarios for a group of intrepid investigators. 
There is no one single approach to creating a scenario any more than there is one way to write a book or compose a song. Here is a selection of starting points. 
Start with setting details and build a story from the ground up 
Picking the 1969 Woodstock Festival as the setting, the Keeper sets about researching the period, people involved, etc., and uses it as inspiration for a plot. 
Start with a mysterious event 
Rather than starting with a general setting, pick a more mysterious or unexplained event and build a scenario based upon it; for example the Tunguska event of 1908 in Russia. 
Devise an alternate history 
Pick a turning point in history and ask what would have happened if things had gone differently; what if the Hitler had used Mythos magic to win the war? 
Pick a monster or god 
Use a Mythos entity as inspiration for a scenario; picking “fire vampire” gives a theme of fire, for example. They may be summoned to attack people and are linked with the god Cthugha. Who might worship such a god, who might want to summon fire vampires and why? 
Create a cult 
In Lovecraft’s stories, many beings of the Mythos are too pow­erful to be defeated by human opponents and so horrific that direct knowledge of them causes insanity. When dealing with such beings, Lovecraft needed a way to provide exposition and build tension without bringing the story to a premature end. Hu­man followers gave him a way to reveal information about their "gods" in a diluted form and made it possible for his protagonists to win paltry victories. If the investigators are going up against powerful Mythos entities every week, it won’t be long before they are all dead. Using human cultists, worshippers, mad scientists and other suitably nefarious characters will provide not only more evenly matched opponents but also variety in your games. 
Survival horror 
The most basic of human motivations is survival. What clearer theme can there be than fighting for one’s life? Sur­vival horror is popular horror sub-genre and can work well for scenarios in which the investigators are thrown head first into a threatening situation and are forced to act to survive. 
Isolation 
Remember, the onus must be on the investigators. It is they who should feel compelled to deal with the situation rather than calling on external help, such as the police. Sometimes the isolation of remote places can be complete, where the investigators are miles away from society and lack the ability to call for help. In other situations they may be isolated by their own volition; perhaps the investigators are wanted for a crime and are forced to isolate themselves to avoid arrest and imprisonment. In such situations the investigators must work on the fringes of society, outside of the protection of the law. 
Pick a story 
Seek inspiration from a Lovecraft story or perhaps some­thing else, such as a film or television show. Make alterations to it, perhaps stripping it down to its essential parts then building it up in a new and interesting way. For example, take The Shadow over Innsmouth and place it in a lush forest­ed area, replacing deep ones with monster-human hybrids who worship Shub-Niggurath. 
Begin with a compelling opening scene 
The investigators begin aboard a bus. Looking out of the window they see a man, apparently a vagrant, screaming at the pigeons. All of a sudden a rip appears in the fabric of space and things begin to spew forth. Perhaps this man is a wizard, opening a gate to the Dreamlands. 
Big ending 
Beware of using a climactic scene as a starting point from which to create a scenario. It can be done, but it involves a lot of work to figure out how to achieve the climax—and what if your players do something that will avert the climactic event? 
A twist or hideous revelation 
Come up with something exciting, mysterious or horrible, then create a scenario as a vehicle to deliver it. M. Night Shyamalan has used this technique to good effect in his films. For example, unbeknownst to them, one of the investigators is the evildoer, possessed or controlled by some malign force. The truth will most likely only be revealed towards the end of the game. 
Begin with the player characters 
Have the players generate their investigators and then use these characters and their backstories as the inspiration for a scenar­io. This has the potential to be a strongly player-led game. 
Construct Layers of Mystery 
At the heart of a Call of Cthulhu scenario is a mystery, some­thing the investigators must find out in order to progress and affect an outcome. Mysteries can be organized like the layers of an onion: each clue tears away one layer and leads to a further question or puzzle to solve (another layer). These layers might go on and on until the investigators feel they have a possible explanation or answer, which in turn directs them to some form of action. 
In Lovecraft’s The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, for example, young Ward begins by investigating the ancient writings of his wizard ancestor (there’s our story; our onion).As he investigates further (peeling away the first layer of the onion), he discovers a technique to raise the dead. He tries it (peeling away a second layer of the onion), and is able to raise his ancestor, who proves to be a near twin of Ward in appearance. This ancestor then becomes Ward’s mentor in the arcane arts (the third layer of the onion). However, young Ward proves too squeamish and his ancestor murders him and takes his place. That’s the end of the scenario for Ward, and the end of the first onion for us. 
Young Ward’s doctor then starts his investigations, researching along the same lines Ward began. This is the initial layer of a new onion. Dr. Willett finds that the ancient house of the sinister ancestor still stands and visits it (the second layer of this onion). In the house’s vast basements, Willett encounters horrific sights and beings, and discovers how to lay to rest the evil ancestor whom he suspects has displaced his patient, young Ward (this is the third layer of the new onion). Now full of knowledge and determination, Willett visits the insane asylum where the evil ancestor masquerades as the young Ward. There, Willett recites the Resurrection spell backward, destroying the ancestor and finishing the second onion and the story as well. 
Each layer of a scenario should present the investigators with two or three choices as to where to proceed. Players should never be certain that they have delved to the bottom of a mystery, except for their own purposes, nor should they ever be certain of the Keeper’s intentions. Obviously, the Keeper cannot make scenarios infinitely deep and complex, so must either break off play when the investigators get too deep, or improvise. If breaking off from play, this should only be until the Keeper manages to extend the scenario further and give more depth to the mysteries. 


Using Lovecraftian Themes 
The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown. —H.P.Lovecraft, Supernatural Horror in Literature 
Key themes can be recognized throughout Lovecraft’s writ­ing, either lurking underneath the text or central to the plot. Utilizing these themes when designing scenarios and run­ning games of Call of Cthulhu can help imbue your games with an undercurrent of Lovecraftian horror. 
Fear…of the Alien, the Outsider, of Knowledge 
A central tenet presented in nearly all of Lovecraft’s fiction is fear of the unknown. Anything that comes from outside of your normal reality, your day to day existence, is to be feared. Such things have a way of invading your space, your life, and ultimately destroying your very personality and way of life. Man is imprisoned and isolated. Truth lies in the dark, secret places of the world; in ancient woods, hollow hills and remote locales. Every stranger could be hiding something, plotting your demise or wanting something of yours. Investigators find themselves cut off from civilization (no phones, ho help, no safety) with no one who will come to their aid. They are the “outsiders”. 
Knowledge causes pain, sorrow, and death. Books of secrets and magic are to be feared; they change how you perceive the world around you, they question your faith and obliterate your very soul. Better they are destroyed or kept hidden lest some fool messes with things best left sleeping. 
The realization that something has affected you, be it alien implants, false memories or dark truths, can make for highly immersive and scary stories. The investigators and their players may not know these secrets as the game starts—part of the horror (and fun) comes from unraveling the mystery and facing up to the big revelation. 
Suggested reading: The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, The Call of Cthulhu. 
Corruption…of the Body, the Mind, the World 
A pervading sense of corruption, in mind and body. Many of Lovecraft’s stories carry a sense of decay in their surroundings and settings, as well as in the mental and physical decay of the protagonists. The slow, but inevitable creep of corruption can be a useful backdrop to a scenario to inspire a theme of fore­boding and dread. Keepers can also take this theme and make it personal; for example, the slow developing and frightening metamorphosis of an investigator into a deep one (the Inns­mouth taint) or a ghoul. Alterations in appearance and habits over time may provoke Sanity point loss for the investigator as well as those around him or her. The investigators in question may not be aware of what is happening, perhaps thinking the 
The King in Yellow, an avatar of Hastur 

changes are caused by the slow creep of a dreadful disease or the results of insanity and delusion. 
Family bloodlines carry “memories” and taints. De­scendants cannot escape the stain of evil crimes committed by their forebears; unwittingly, they begin to mirror such dark deeds. Exposure to the Mythos drains not only sanity but also humanity. Those who repeatedly risk contact with things not of this world may become corrupted, losing their faith and mind. What lengths would such a person go to? 
The world around us is decaying. Walk any street, look at the signs in the window, look into the eyes of strangers on the street corners. The end is near. What hope is left? Every­thing good crumbles away and is replaced with a mocking, choking darkness. 
Suggested reading: The Rats in the Walls, The Lurking Fear, The Shadow Over Innsmouth, The Colour Out of Space. 
Cosmic Horror…the Nightmare of Reality, the Place of Humanity, the Cold Universe 
At the start of the twentieth century, humanity’s increased reliance upon science was both opening new worlds and solidifying the manners by which they could be understood. Lovecraft portrays this scientific potential as a terrifying hole in man's understanding of the universe. 
The cosmos is uncaring and humanity is but a speck of dust, inconsequential. Mankind is simply, at best, sport for those from outside to prey upon. The universe is a dark place that mocks humanity’s feeble attempts to understand it. 
The quest for the unknown is the pursuit of madness. Strange experiments gone wrong (or right!) and the con­struction of devices that lift the veil of mankind’s ignorance lead such explorers into darkest and most terrifying realms of reality and possibility. Man was not meant to know such things and those who seek for the unknown return “changed.” The very biology and composition of Mythos creatures is be­yond man’s ability to know and understand. It is dangerous to become exposed to such matter; even being in the presence of such creatures and their technology is anathema to humans, causing headaches, pain and a pervading dread. 
Suggested reading: The Dreams in the Witch House, From Beyond, At the Mountains of Madness. 
Of course, Lovecraft didn’t confine himself to Cthulhu Mythos stories and neither should you. Gain inspiration from other writers, television, films and folklore. Let your imagination roam. 
Opening Scene 
Every journey starts with a first step. The start of a scenario establishes the premise by which the investigators become involved and effectively provides the players with their ini­tial direction of investigation and research. 
Don’t miss the opportunity to hook the players’ interest from the first with an exciting or intriguing opening scene. Ensure that it is thoroughly engaging and something the investigators can’t ignore. 

Anatomy of a Linear Scenario 
While scenarios can come in all shapes and forms, the majority share some common elements, much like a classic piece of detective fiction. A beginning, middle and an end is a good place to start. Without these three a scenario will lack definition and has the potential to become a confusing mess, not only for the players, but also for the Keeper. 
The beginning sets up the whole game: it hooks the players’ interest, sets the tone and mood, and provides an initial source of clues and leads for investigation. The middle is where the investigators get to pursue information, meet non-player characters, discover clues and begin to piece together the bigger picture. The end comes when the investigators have (more or less) discovered what’s going on and have decided to confront the big villain or at least have a workable solution to solve the mystery. All this comes to a climax, when the truth is (probably) revealed, the vil­lain caught or dispatched, and some form of resolution is reached. 

Linear adventures can be characterized like a car journey. If you know your destination you can plan a route—perhaps driving a certain way to take in some wonderful scenery. If you encounter bad traffic en route, you can make a detour. This might affect your journey time but you’ll still get to your destination in the end. The scenario starts at point “A” and ends at point “E”, with the investigators journeying through points “B”, “C” and “D” en route. 

Constructing a plot is essential to good linear scenario design, and this is easy to do. Just think about the books you’ve read, films and TV you’ve watched and stories you’ve been told. All of these can provide great inspiration. Don’t be afraid to steal a cool idea or recreate a whole story as the basis of your scenario’s plot—every Keeper worth his or her (es­sential) salt steals from movies and books. If you don’t know where to start, grab a collection of Lovecraft stories and get reading! Changing a few names and mixing up the monsters in a particular Lovecraft story is the perfect way to start. 
Most players, as they become more familiar with the game and confident in their investigators, will want to diverge from the linear scenario. Rather than follow the obvious clues laid out for them by the Keeper, they will want to follow up a different clue or even come up with a line of enquiry entirely of their own devising. Suddenly the adventure is sidetracked and the Keeper may be tempted to contrive something to get the story back on its intended track rather than go where the players are heading. If the players are compelled back to the Keeper’s prepared plot, they will come to feel that their contribution is of little value and that they are simply following a preordained story rath­er than creating their own. This means that it’s time to look at running scenarios in a non-linear way. 

The Anatomy of a Non-Linear Scenario 
Novice Keepers are advised to create linear stories at first, moving on to non-linear scenarios as their experience and confidence grows. 
In a non-linear adventure, after starting out at point A, the successive points may be encountered in a different order each time the scenario is played and various unknown endings may ultimately be reached. 
In creating a sandbox, the Keeper is establishing a “geog­raphy” for the game wherein numerous interconnected or separate plots can be set for the investigators to discover over the course of play. Should the players go off at a tangent, the Keeper is well versed enough in the setting to accommodate the developing story. Note that you are not writing a story when you create a non-linear scenario. Above all, you do not script an ending—avoid this at all costs! You may write a backstory, but it must stop where the game starts. What you are creating is plot elements (non-player characters, locations, etc.), but how these are woven together in to a story is decided during play. You may also make a timeline of events that will take place in the story if the course of events is not altered by the investigators, but you must be ready to alter the events on the timeline according to the actions of the players. 
Sometimes the players will miss clues or head down a path the Keeper did not foresee.  This is fine; in fact, it is better than fine, as some of the best parts of a game are those improvised in play. 
Non-linear adventures give the players’ choice in how to proceed. The very fact that unexpected things will happen be­cause of the players’ choices makes for a more exciting game for everyone—the Keeper included. In this sense, the story really does become a collaboration between the Keeper and players. 
Campaigns 
If a scenario were likened to an episode of a television series, a campaign would be a season or perhaps an entire series. A published campaign is divided in to chapters, each of which might be considered one scenario. The chapters are linked with a common theme or story-arc. Depending on the campaign, the chapters may need to be completed in a set order or there may be a flexibility to accommodate playing the chapters in different orders, depending on the actions of the investigators. 

First, think up several scenario plots, each only two or three layers deep. With three or four scenarios in mind, think about how they might connect to a central horror or mystery. The players start out fooling around with the very edges of the Mythos, where there are dozens of myths, legends, clues, and adventures. As they gain more knowledge and experience, the investigators will work their way inward, into stories of greater depth. After several such stories, the players should begin to see the links between the various scenarios. At the center of the mystery lies the hideous truth and the climax of the campaign. 
There should be hoaxes and meaningless trails sprinkled among the scenarios. These will keep your world from de­generating into a mass of monsters and their kin. Gamblers, spies, religious fanatics, drug smugglers, slavers, grasping entrepreneurs, venal labor bosses, terrorists, movie stars, nefarious politicians and piratical sea captains are also avail­able. An occasional scenario with dangers originating from this (mundane) world might divert your players, but keep in mind that the main theme of the game is the investigators’ struggle against the Cthulhu Mythos. 
Within each scenario you prepare, sprinkle additional information that relates to the “big picture”—the main plot and what is really happening in the background. As the investigators work through the scenarios, these disparate pieces of information should begin to form connections, driving the investigators to pursue new lines of enquiry and leading them ever deeper into the main plot until they reach a point of realization as to what is really going on and who the real enemy is. This point of realization from various disassociated clues should prepare the investigators for their biggest challenge and the climax of the campaign. 
Chaosium has published a number of campaigns for Call of Cthulhu, including Horror on the Orient Express and The Masks of Nyarlathotep. If you are you new to the concept of campaigns then reading (and playing!) through a published campaign will give you a good grasp of how individual scenarios can be linked to form a campaign. 

Level of Detail 
We’ve looked at how to structure linear and non-linear scenarios and campaigns, but what should a finished sce­nario look like? The scenarios at the back of this book are by different authors, each with their own style. However, these are of course published scenarios and each has had to meet certain requirements and standards that may not be required for the homegrown scenario. Let’s take a look at the form your scenario might take. 
Just as there is no single way to start when writing a sce­nario, there is no prescribed end product. Compare creating a scenario with making a speech. When making a speech, some people are able to make it up on the spot with little or no preparation, while others make a few notes to improvise around and still others write the whole thing out word for word. These various levels of preparation can work equally well—there is no right or wrong here. The important thing is to know what level of detail you personally require. 
How to Use a Published Scenario 
The great thing about a published scenario is that the work has been done for you and lots of detailed background and setting material is provided for you to use. Depending on how you approach it, this can feel like a blessing or a burden. If you are someone who can read a large quantity of text quickly, identify the salient points and retain the informa­tion then you are off to a flying start. Most of us, however, will find we forget certain parts, requiring us to break the flow of the game to consult the scenario text, clumsily leafing through the pages in search of those elusive but seemingly all-important details. 
So how best to use a published scenario? To start with, leaf through the scenario and gain an overview of the chapters and contents, then read the whole document thoroughly from cover to cover once. You should now have a good understanding of what the scenario is about, but you may still be hazy on some of the details, perhaps not quite grasping the roles played by some of the non-player characters; this is fine. 
Next, work through the scenario again, this time taking notes. Try to write a bare minimum. Avoid superfluous detail or things that you feel confident that you’ll remember anyway. Identify text that is simply adding color and reduce or omit it. For example, the text might describe a bedroom in great detail, down to the color of the bedspread, the wallpaper, the contents of the bedside cabinet and other furnishings. If you are confident that none of this informa­tion is vital and that you can improvise a description of a similar room during play then there is no need to record the details in your notes. You are not doing the published adventure any disrespect—the printed text of the scenario has served its purpose in communicating to you, the reader, an image of the bedroom. When you run the game you will be able to describe a bedroom inspired by what you read in the scenario. Whether the bedspread is pink or blue is neither here nor there. What may be important is whether it is an opulent suite or a seedy bedsit, and you will know this from having read the published text. 
Be sure to identify and note down anything that is es­sential to the scenario. You will know what is important and what is not because you have read the scenario once already. Clearly if the scenario notes that there is a copy of the Cultes des Goules in the bedside cabinet then you need to note its presence. In your mind it might better be concealed under the bed or beneath a loose floorboard—the location is not important, only its presence. 
To run a scenario effectively you need to feel ownership of it. After this second reading of the published scenario, you should have a set of notes from which you can run the game in your own way. See how you have distilled a published scenario back to Keeper’s notes, perhaps similar to those used by the author when the game was run for the very first time. Use these notes as a framework and with your players you’ll create wonderful new stories that would amaze the scenario’s author! 

And Finally... 
If there’s one thing you need above all others to make this game fun, it is a positive enthusiasm to make stuff up and create conflict and drama. That spark of life trumps all the rules and advice that anyone can give you on how to run a game. On its own, enthusiasm will not make you a great Keeper, but without it you will never be one. If anything in this book excited you, then focus on that. Get fired up, get excited and share that with your players so that they feel it too. 
Now go and have fun! 



They worshipped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had never died. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Call of Cthulhu 


ythos tomes are the repositories of arcane wis­dom, terrible secrets and powerful magic. They provide the seeker of enlightenment with stark truths about reality, existence and presence of those from outside. For the unwary, such 

books delineate a path to nightmare, horror and insanity. 
This chapter summarizes the books of the Cthulhu Mythos most often mentioned in the fiction of the Lovecraft Circle of writers. 
Describing Mythos Tomes 
Some Mythos volumes are recent enough in origin to have been printed with movable type. Those editions were usu­ally published privately in short press runs and only sold to rich collectors or acquaintances. Upon publication, copies often were sought out and destroyed by the authorities due to their scandalous nature. Better these texts be burned and suppressed. Such was the fate of the original publication of The King in Yellow. 
Where surviving copies exist, these have often have been ill-treated by the crazed or malicious, or else rebound to disguise their blasphemous contents. Bound manuscripts were never regularized by typesetting and printing, and their wavering, blotted handwriting may be wholly incom­prehensible for pages at a time, a situation remedied only by great dedication and scholarship. 
Even though each book’s summary is uniform, assume that each copy of a Mythos book can be different from its fellows. Though the logic of that potential diminishes for recent books, such as Azathoth and Others, even then bindings may be broken, pages torn out and signatures missing or wrongly collated. Contents may be ink-stained or acid-scarred, with pages half-burnt and the words made illegible or utterly defaced by madmen (or by sane men who sought to destroy the dangerous information therein). Unique information may be written as marginalia or jotted down on notepaper and inserted here or there. 
Some tomes begin to possess their own “character” as they grow in age. Passed down through the generations, between family members, booksellers and collectors, the tomes seem to absorb an imprint of their owners. This can be more than simply the wandering marginalia of occult scholars; with some books apparently manifesting distinct “personalities” that echo once powerful owners, such as grand sorcerers and cult potentates. Consider the smell, feel and look of Mythos books. The overall impression ought to be distinctly unhealthy. The binding will probably be leath­er, perhaps human or even that of some unworldly being. Does the leather leave a slimy residue when touched? Does the book leave a musky odor wherever it has been? Does the presence of the tome cause the pages of other, nearby books to char and blacken? Perhaps the book appears to move of its own accord, never to be found where the investigator remembers placing it… 
Sorcerers and cultists are not librarians. They are uncon­cerned with the needs of posterity. They intend themselves to live forever and they consider the knowledge contained within their tomes to be theirs by right and not to be lightly passed to the unworthy. 
Undiscovered Editions 
If an original language version is found of a work that until then was known only in translation, then the original version is more informative. Add a few percentiles to the Cthulhu Mythos skill reward. Treat the original edition as another edition. The Keeper chooses the book’s original language and can make up its title in that language as well. 
If a you create a new Mythos tome for some purpose, you should have a suitable name for it, know the language of its composition, know what it looks and feels like, know how many Sanity points are lost in reading it, know how many Cthulhu Mythos points its comprehension adds, and be able to determine what spells (if any) can be found within it. 
Using Mythos Tomes 
Despite the dangers, investigators will choose to study this or that terrifying book. The process of reading can be leisurely and can be suspended at any point for as long as need be. 
Consider that each book is a potential conduit of Mythos power and energy—a physical and mental portal to the madness of secrets beyond the reasoning of mortal man. Books of power may exert a dark influence on those who possess them, stoking their desire for blasphemous knowl­edge, kindling a fascination for the occult and ultimately driving the owner to delve deep in to the Mythos and court insanity. In many Lovecraftian stories, the protagonist is thrown headfirst in to the horrors of the Mythos as a result of some Mythos artifact or tome. 
Akin to spells, Mythos tomes can unbalance a game if used too freely. Such books are a conduit for Cthulhu Mythos knowledge and spells, providing the investigators with a po­tential source of great power in combating the machinations of the Mythos. If everywhere the investigators turn they find a Mythos tome then the game can become predictable and the challenge lessened. Obtaining a Mythos book could be a scenario in itself or at least a suitably dangerous sidetrack to a campaign, allowing the investigators to gain secrets that help them in their quest against the minions of the Mythos. 
This power and knowledge comes at a price. In Call of Cthulhu, this usually means an increasing descent in to madness. While players will desire to gain Mythos books, they should also fear them, due to the terrible sanity deplet­ing effect they will have on their investigators. 
Investigator possession of a Mythos tome should always carry a consequence. This may simply be the cost in sanity as described above or some other story related consequence. 
Try to devise corrupted investigator background entries that drive the story forward. Think about how the investi­gator’s relationship with the Mythos tome could be manip­ulated to compel the game’s narrative, add further depth to the investigator, and suggest roleplaying opportunities to the player concerned. While other investigators view the Mythos tome in question as a smelly, evil-looking book, the investigator who has become corrupted by it will see it in a quite different light. An investigator may feel compelled to hide the book away in case it gets “hurt” or perhaps the deluded investigator cannot read another book without the tome’s text burning through the print. 

Possible corrupted investigator background entries: T The tome was a source of secrets I must know— I must get more! T No one is allowed to touch my book. T The book speaks to me and I must obey. T The book is evil and so am I for reading it. T Wherever I put the book it kills anything near to it. T The book is changing me—I hunger for human flesh! 

Mythos books may also provide the inspiration for in­vestigator delusions (Insanity side-effects 2: Delusions and Reality Checks, see page @@). Perhaps the book somehow influences the investigator or the investigator sees the book everywhere—even though it was apparently destroyed. Delusions centered on a Mythos tome can have all manner of effects upon the investigators, whether to throw them off­track or guide them through insane insight. 
A Note About the Entries 
Information about the tomes described may be known by erudite bibliophiles, historians and by a few in the rare book trade. While it is unlikely that such books will be found on the shelves of the common public library, some can be found in the rare book sections of certain universities and in private collections. Apart from those listed, other ver­sions, as well as lesser Mythos, works exist, as do incidental notebooks, diaries and letters. Keepers are advised to review the entries for inspiration when designing new volumes of forgotten lore, cultist notebooks and so on. 

Bulleted entries indicate different versions of the same original. Where two dates are noted for multiple Mythos books: the latter date in each case is the date ascribed in the original story. Some dates are conjectural. If available at all, the number of copies listed reflects those known held in public and private collections. More existing copies are very likely. 
Dimensions given are traditional, since actual sizes often vary between copies. Folios range from 12.5" x 20" to 10" x 15". Quartos vary between 10" x 12.5" and 7.5" x 10". Octa­vos range between 6.25" x 10" and 5" x 7.5". 
The summaries also include average weeks of study per book. When using such numbers, take into account the individual reader’s skills and profession. Use the times and dates given here as comparative indicators of difficulty. Each investigator will study and comprehend a book at a different rate. 
Al-Azif—see Necronomicon. 
Azathoth and Others 
English, Edward Derby, 1919 
A collection of the Arkham-born poet’s early works. Pub­lished in Boston in a pocket-sized edition, 3.5" x 5.5" and bound in black leather. Approximately 1,400 copies were printed and sold. 
Sanity Loss: 1D4 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+3 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 12 
Study: 1 week 
Suggested Spells: none. 

Book of Dzyan 
English, author and translation unknown, reputedly of ancient origin. 
Long referred to by theosophist Helena Blavatsky, a copy of this tome has never been verified. Said to be a translation of manuscripts original to Atlantis. Also called the Stanzas of Dzyan. Portions of this work were translated as The Secret Doctrine, but that includes no spells or other Mythos infor­mation. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 27 
Study: 14 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call Forth Childe of the Woode (Sum­mon/Bind Dark Young), Call Forth Wind Spirit (Summon/Bind Byakhee), Call Forth The Unseen Walker (Summon/Bind Dimensional Shambler), Dream Vision (Contact Deity/Cthulhu). 

The Book Of Eibon 
Three versions follow: 
Book Of Eibon 
English, translation unknown, c. 15th century 
A flawed and incomplete translation. Eighteen copies by 
various hands are known to exist today. Sanity Loss: 2D4 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+8 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 33 
Study: 32 
Suggested Spells: Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Contact Formless Spawn of Zhothaqquah (Tsathoggua), Contact Deity/ Kthulhut (Cthulhu), Contact Deity/ Yok Zothoth (Yog-Sothoth), Contact Deity/Zhoth­aqquah (Tsathoggua), Create Gate, Create Mist of R’lyeh, Eibon’s Wheel of Mist, Enchant Brazier, Enchant Knife, Green Decay, Levitate, Wither Limb. 
Egyptians are thought to have comeinto possession of the Book of Eibonthrough trading with fabled Atlantis.Survivors of the great Atlantian disaster are also thought to have carried the book, inscribed on tablets, with them to many parts of Europe,including Ireland, France, and Greece. 
Liber Ivonis 
Latin, translated by Caius Phillipus Faber, 9th century 
Although the original is said to have been written by Eibon, wizard of Hyperborea, no earlier versions than the Latin have been verified. Never printed, six bound manuscript versions have been listed in library collections. 
Sanity Loss: 2D4 
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+9 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 39 
Study: 36 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Contact Formless Spawn of Zhothaqquah (Tsathoggua), Contact Deity/ Kthulhut (Cthulhu), Contact Deity/ Yok Zothoth (Yog-Sothoth), Contact Deity/Zhoth­aqquah (Tsathoggua), Create Barrier of Naach-Tith, Create Gate, Create Mist of R’lyeh, Deflect Harm, Eibon’s Wheel of Mist, Enchant Brazier, Enchant Knife, Green Decay, Levitate, Voorish Sign, Wither Limb. 
Livre D’Ivon 
French, translated by Gaspard du Nord, c. 13th century 
Bound, handwritten manuscript of which thirteen speci­mens, partial or complete, are known to exist. Sanity Loss: 2D4 Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles Mythos Rating: 36 Study: 36 weeks Suggested Spells: same as Liber Ivonis. 
Celaeno Fragments 
Holographic manuscript in English, by Dr. Laban Shrewsbury, 1915 (1938) 
A single copy is known to exist, deposited at Miskatonic University Library shortly before the author mysteriously disappeared. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 27 
Study: 15 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Brew Space Mead, Call Cthugha, Elder Sign, Enchant Whistle, Summon/Bind Byakhee. 
Confessions of the Mad Monk Clithanus 
Latin, by Clithanus, 400 (1674) 
A retreading of material Clithanus gleaned from reading the Necronomicon. Contains lengthy treatise on sigils of protection and the spawn of Cthulhu. 
Copies are maintained at the Field Museum of Chicago, the British Museum and the Union Theological Seminary in Manhattan. 
Sanity Loss: 2D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 27 
Study: 29 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Cast Out the Devil, Call Down the Blasphemies of the Oceans (Contact Star-Spawn of Cthulhu), Sign of the Master (Elder Sign), Warding. 
Cthaat Aquadingen 
Two versions follow: 
Cthaat Aquadingen 
Latin, author unknown, c. 11-12th century 
A comprehensive study of the deep ones. Three copies of this Latin version exist, identically bound in human skin said to sweat when the humidity drops too low. One is allegedly held at the British Museum—although the museum denies this, and the other two are owned by British collectors. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+9 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 39 
Study: 46 weeks to study 
Suggested Spells: Dreams from God (Contact Deity/ Cthulhu), Dreams from Zattoqua (Contact Deity/ Tsathoggua), Dreams of the Drowner (Contact Deity/Yibb-Tstll), Speak with Sea Children (Contact Deep Ones), Speak with Father Dagon, Speak with Mother Hydra (Contact Deep One/Mother Hydra) Speak with God-Child (Contact Star-Spawn of Cthulhu), Nyhargo Dirge (this last spell is a reversal of the Resurrection spell used to destroy revenants). 
Cthaat Aquadingen 
Middle English, author and translator unknown, c. 14th cen­tury 
A comprehensive study of the deep ones, but in an incom­plete and deeply flawed translation. A single bound manu­script is held by the British Museum. 
Sanity Loss: 2D4 
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+4 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 18 
Study: 29 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Dreams from God (Contact Deity/ Cthulhu), Speak with Sea Children (Contact Deep Ones), Speak with Father Dagon, Speak with Mother Hydra, Speak with God-Child (Contact Star-Spawn of Cthulhu). 

Cthulhu in the Necronomicon 
English, written by Dr.Laban Shrewsbury, 1915 (pub: 1938) 
Handwritten notes toward an intended book. Deposited at Miskatonic University Library shortly before the author mysteriously disappeared. Tells of Cthulhu’s power to affect men’s dreams, warning of a worldwide cult dedicated to the creature’s return. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+4 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 18 
Study: 14 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Contact Deity/Cthulhu, Contact Deep Ones, Elder Sign. 

Cultes des Goules 
French, by François-Honore Balfour, Comte d’Erlette, 1702? 
Published in 1703 in France (Paris?), in a quarto edition. The Church immediately denounced it. Catalogues a large cult practicing necromancy, necrophagy and necrophilia in France. Fourteen copies are known to exist, the most recent surfacing in 1906. 
Sanity Loss: 1D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 36 
Study: 22 weeks to study 
Suggested Spells: Black Binding, Call/Dismiss Nyogtha, Call/Dismiss Shub-Niggurath, Contact Ghoul, Resurrection, Shrivelling, Summon/Bind Byakhee, Summon/Bind Dark Young, Voorish Sign. 


De Vermiis Mysteriis 
Latin, by Ludwig Prinn, 1542 
Black letter folio printed in Cologne, Germany, in the same year. Suppressed by the Church. Fifteen copies have survived. In part discusses the Arab world, and things supernatural there. 
Sanity Loss: 2D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 36 
Study: 48 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Contact Deity/Yig, Create Scrying Window, Create Zombie, Invoke Demon (Summon/ Bind Byakhee), Invoke Child of the Goat (Summon/ Bind Dark Young), Invoke Invisible Servant (Sum­mon/Bind Star Vampire), Prinn’s Crux Ansata, Mind Transfer, Command Ghost, Voorish Sign. 
Divided into sixteen chapters,De Vermiis Mysteriis concerns itselfwith a varied assortment of topics,including divination arts, necromancy, thecreation of familiars, as well as bizarre theories and descriptions of entities suchas vampires, sprites and elementals. Certaincopies of the tome have large sectionswritten in what is considered to be Ogham(Druidic runes). Some suspect the Oghamis a cipher used by Prinn to “hide” morerevealing and blasphemous ideas. Rumorscirculated in the early twentieth centuryconcerning the Esoteric Order of Dagonwho were allegedly seeking an original copyof the book. It is believed that within the ciphered sections is formulae to hastenthe metamorphosis of a human in to adeep one. 
Eltdown Shards 
English, by Rev. Arthur Brooke Winters-Hall, 1912 
Questionable translation of mysterious hieroglyphs found on clay fragments in southern England, in an edition of 350 pamphlets, 64 pages. Tells of beings that could exchange minds with others across space and time. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+8 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 33 
Study: 6 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Contact Yithian. 
G’harne Fragments 
English, by Sir Amery Wendy-Smith, 1919 (pub: 1931) 
Scholarly study and translation of shards inscribed with cu­rious dot patterns. Discusses the lost city of G’harne in great deal, including its location. The shards were discovered by Windrop in North Africa. The original edition was 958 cop­ies printed at the author’s expense as a humble sixteenmo (4.5" x5.75"). 
Sanity Loss: 1D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+7 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 30 
Study: 12 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Contact Chthonian, Contact Elder Thing, Contact Shudde M’ell, Red Sign of Shudde M’ell. 
The King in Yellow 
English, translator unknown, c. 1895 
The original is in French, apparently, but that edition was seized and destroyed by the Third Republic just after pub­lication. The English edition is a thin black octavo volume across the front cover of which is embossed a large Yellow Sign. Until the book has been read, the Sign has no effect on the viewer, except to imbue a sense of curiosity. After reading the book (or after having contact with anything or anyone from Carcosa), viewing the sign costs 0/1D6 Sanity points to see (for one time only). The text is an ambiguous, dreamlike play that opens readers to madness. Uniquely, readers cannot opt to disbelieve what is written here. Those of an artistic bent will feel compelled to reread the play. If the book results in insanity, the reader should become ob­sessed with Carcosa and the King in Yellow (see Yellow Sign, page @@). 
Sanity Loss: 1D10 Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+4 percentiles Mythos Rating: 15 Study: 1 week to study Suggested Spells: none. 
Liber Ivonis, Livre D’ivon—see Book of Eibon 
Massa di Requiem Per Shuggay 
Italian, by Benvenuto Chieti Brodighera, 1768 
An opera score and libretto never published and believed to have been performed only once. Deals with rape, incest and other degradations. Knowledgeable musicians pronounce portions of it unplayable. Copies are held by the British Museum, the Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris, and probably the Vatican’s Z-collection. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+3 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 12 
Study: 2 weeks 
Suggested Spells: (performed with full chorus and orchestra), Call Azathoth is cast about midway through the third act. 

Monstres and their Kynde 
English, author unknown, 16th century 
A single folio version of this handwritten book existed and that was stolen from the British Museum in 1898. Rumors of other copies continue to persist to this day, though none has been verified. Contains a jumble of topics drawn from the Necronomicon, Book of Eibon, and a variety of other tomes. Many entities are discussed, including Cthulhu, Yog-Sothoth, and Lloigor, the twin of Zhar. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+6 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 24 
Study: 36 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Command Faceless One (Summon/ Bind Nightgaunt), Command Ice Demon (Sum­mon/Bind Byakhee), Command Invisible Servant (Summon/Bind Star Vampire), Command Night Beast (Summon/Bind Hunting Horror), Command Star Walker (Summon/Bind Dimensional Sham­bler), Enchant Altar, Enchant Blade, Enchant Pipes. 

Nameless Cults 
Three versions follow: 
Unausprechlichen Kulten 
German, by Friedrich Wilhelm von Junzt, 1839 Properly known as Das Buch von den unaussprechlichen Kulten. A quarto, possibly printed in Hamburg. This vol­ume, long referred to as the Black Book, tells of von Junzt’s connections to various cults and secret societies. Other editions are rumored. Six copies are known to be in major libraries in Europe and America. The original edition boasts the horrific engravings of Gunther Hasse. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8; 
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 45 
Study: 52 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Approach Brother (Contact Ghoul), Barrier of Naach-Tith, Beckon Great One (Contact Dagon), Call Aether Devil (Contact Mi-Go), Call Forth the Sun (Call/Dismiss Azathoth), Call Forth Cyaegha (Call/Dismiss Cyaegha), Call Forth the Horned Man (Call/Dismiss Nyarlathotep), Call Forth That Which Should Not Be (Call/Dismiss Nyogtha), Call Forth the Woodland Goddess (Call/ Dismiss Shub-Niggurath), Command Airy Trav­ellers (Summon/Bind Byakhee), Command the Trees (Summon/Bind Dark Young), Command the Unknown (Call/Dismiss Ghatanothoa), Contact Children of the Deep (Contact Deep Ones), Revivi­fy (Resurrection). 

Nameless Cults 
English, translator unknown, published 1845 
An unauthorized translation published by Bridewell of En­gland (probably London) in an octavo edition. At least twenty copies are held in various collections. Badly flawed text. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 36 
Study: 48 weeks 
Suggested Spells: as per Unausprechlichen Kulten, but most of these spell versions are incomplete or faulty. 
Nameless Cults 
English, translator unknown, published 1909 
An expurgated version of the faulty Bridewell text, pub­lished by Golden Goblin Press, New York. Contains only descriptions of spells, not the complete rituals of the earlier editions. With some looking, this edition can be found in used bookstores. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 27 
Study: 30 weeks 
Suggested Spells: none 
The Necronomicon 
See the back of the chapter for a full description of the blas­phemous tome. Five versions follow. 
AL-AZIF 
Arabic, by Abdul al-Hazrad (Abd al-Azrad), c. 730 AD 
Original form is unknown, but numerous manuscript versions were long circulated between medieval scholars. As early as the 12th century, this version was referred to as lost. It is an immense compendium touching on nearly every aspect of the Mythos, and a capable reference on most subjects, including charts and star maps. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +6/+12 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 54 
Study: 68 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Call/Dismiss Cthugha, Call/Dismiss Hastur, Call/Dismiss Nyogtha, Call/Dismiss Shub-Niggurath, Call/Dismiss Yog-So­thoth, Contact Ghoul, Contact Deity/Nyarlathotep, Contact Sand Dweller, Dominate, Dread Curse of Azathoth, Dust of Suleiman, Elder Sign, Powder of Ibn-Ghazi, Resurrection, Shrivelling, Summon/Bind Byakhee, Summon/Bind Fire Vampire, Summon/ Bind Servitor of the Outer Gods, Voorish Sign. 
Necronomicon 
Greek, translated by Theodoras Philetas, c. 950 AD 
Early manuscript versions are unknown. A small printing in (Florence?) Italy in a folio edition was suppressed by the Church; it lacked any drawings, maps or charts. Last known copy burned in Salem, 1692. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+12 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 51 
Study: 68 weeks 
Suggested Spells: same as Al–Azif. 
Necronomicon 
Latin, translated by Olaus Wormius, 1228 AD 
First circulated in manuscript form, then printed in Ger­many (late 15th century) as a black-letter folio. A second, nearly identical edition was published in Spain in the early 17th century. One copy of the former edition and four cop­ies of the latter are known to exist. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+11 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 48 
Study: 66 weeks 
Suggested Spells: same as Al-Azif. 
Necronomicon 
English, translated by Dr. John Dee, 1586 
An accurate but expurgated version of the Greek transla­tion. Never printed; exists in bound manuscript form only. Three nearly complete copies are known. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 45 
Study: 50 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call Forth the Angel Yazrael (Call/ Dismiss Yog-Sothoth), Call Forth the Lord of the Pit (Call/Dismiss Nyogtha), Command the Angel Dilyah (Summon/Bind Servitor of the Outer Gods), Consult Dark Servant (Contact Ghoul), Consult Ye Spirit of the Earth (Contact Nyarlathotep), Domi­nate, Dust of Suleiman, Elder Sign, Powder of Ibn-Ghazi, Voorish Sign. 



The Necronomicon 
Every tome has its own history and the Keeper is invited to use this entry regarding the Necronomicon as inspiration for his or her own stories of other tomes or similar artifacts. 
While more ancient works are hinted at, in human lan­guages it is the Necronomicon that best relates the reach and meaning of the Cthulhu Mythos. 
The Necronomicon is encyclopedic and baffling, contain­ing deep Mythos magic and knowledge, including a chant to Yog-Sothoth which can open the Way to this world, infor­mation on the powder of Ibn-Ghazi, and a description of the Voorish Sign. The tome also discusses the nature of existence, details many locations and places (some not of this Earth), and provides grim descriptions of some Mythos entities. Allusions are definitions, inflections are explanations, wishes are proofs, and decoration and design are indistinguishable. The vocabulary is as interior as that of a dream. The Necro­nomicon is the gateway to insanity, the path through which humans pass, metamorphose and emerge unrecognizable. 
History 
The original version of the Necronomicon, known as the Kitab Al-Azif, was written around 730 A.D. in Damascus by the Arab, Abdul Al-Hazred (Abd al-Azrad). A student of magic as well as an astronomer, poet, philosopher and scientist, al-Azrad was born around 700 A.D. in Sanaa, Yemen. Before composing his great work he spent years visiting the ruins of Babylon, the pits of Memphis and the great southern desert of Arabia. 
He died in Damascus in 738, according to his 12th-centu­ry biographer, Ebn Khallikan, devoured in broad daylight by an invisible demon. Manuscripts of the Al-Azif circulated se­cretly among philosophers and scientists of the age, however it was not until the year 950 that the work was translated into Greek by the Byzantine Theodorus Philetas, who renamed it the Necronomicon. Numerous copies of Philetas’ manuscript were made. The increased circulation of the blasphemous tome led to its eventual condemnation in 1050 by the Patri­arch Michael of Constantinople. Many copies were confiscat­ed and destroyed, their owners suffering harsh penalties. 
In 1228, Olaus Wormius effected a Latin translation of the Greek version, all copies of the original Arabic having by this time been lost. Its rapid circulation among philosophical circles led to its banning in 1232, both the Latin and Greek versions placed on the Index Expurgatorius by Pope Gregory 
IX. Olaus did not re-title the Greek Necronomicon, and the work is thereafter commonly referred to by that name. 
The year 1454 saw the first practical printing press using moveable type and before the end of the century a black-letter version of the Latin Necronomicon had been printed in Ger­many, probably in Mainz. The text does not identify the date or place of printing. 
In the early sixteenth century, probably before 1510, a version of the Greek translation was printed in Italy. Although again lacking any identifying marks, this version is generally believed to have come from the press of Aldus Manutius, founder of the Aldine Press, famous for its printing of unedit­ed Greek and Latin texts. 

In 1586 an English translation of the Necronomicon was produced by Dr. John Dee, mathematician, astrologer and physician to Queen Elizabeth of England. Never published, Dee’s translation is believed to have been made from a Greek edition discovered by the doctor during his travels in Eastern Europe. Although accurate, it is incomplete, partially expur­gated by its translator. 
A second printing of the Latin version was made in Spain in the early seventeenth century. As usual, the printer is un­identified but the poorer cut of the type distinguishes it from the finer German work. It is in all other ways faithful to the earlier edition. 
Other versions 

Other versions and partial copies of the Necronomicon exist. The Sussex Manuscript, also known as the Cultus Malefi­carum, is an English translation made by a Baron Frederic from the Latin text, published in Sussex in 1597. The mud­dled and incomplete Al-Azif—Ye Booke of ye Arab, written in provincial English, was made in the late sixteenth century and circulated in hand-copied manuscript. The 116-page medieval Voynich Manuscript, presently in the collection of the University of Pennsylvania, is written in Greek and Latin using Arab script. 
Surviving Copies 

Condemned and destroyed by the Church, only five copies of the Necronomicon are known to exist today, although an unknown number of copies may still be held in private collections. Copies that reach the open market are usually purchased by libraries or private collectors. The resultant increase in value has driven the price beyond the range of most serious students of the occult. Few can afford to obtain their own copies of this dark and powerful book, and, given the value and fragile conditions of the existing copies, few public institutions allow unrestricted access. 
The documented extant copies are all Latin versions, four from the surreptitious 17th-century Spanish printing and the fifth a single surviving specimen of the fine 16th century German edition. The four remnants of the edition printed in Spain are presently held in the collections of the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, the Miskatonic University Library in Arkham, the Widener Library at Harvard, and the library of the University of Buenos Aires. The precious single copy of the edition printed in Germany resides in the British Museum in London. 

Although the last known copy in Greek is believed to have perished in flames during the chaos of the Salem witch trials in Massachusetts, rumors of other Greek copies occasionally surface. The most recent of these claimed that a copy was owned by the New York artist Richard Upton Pickman. If true, the book apparently disappeared along with the artist in 1926. 
Handmade copies of the Dee version, most of them dam­aged and incomplete, are still occasionally unearthed. The most recent find was made by Miskatonic University, which now has a nearly complete Dee Necronomicon in its enviable collection. The decidedly less rare Sussex Manuscript also can be found in Miskatonic’s collection and in many other large libraries as well. It is generally believed that no copies of the Arabic original have survived to the present day, although persistent rumors suggest that a copy surfaced in San Francis­co shortly before the disastrous earthquake and fire of 1906. The claim that an Arabic copy is part of the collection in the British Museum has been recently disproved. 
Physical Descriptions 

All known printed editions of the Necronomicon are fo­lio-sized. The Latin editions printed in Spain and Germany measure 18 by 11-1/2 inches and contain 802 pages, one leaf being bound in as a tabbed insert. Records suggest that the Greek version was several pages longer. The type style is black-letter gothic and numerous woodcuts illustrate the text. Bindings, as with all books of this period, are individual, reflecting the tastes of the books’ original owners. 
The Necronomicon found in the British Museum is in a 15th-century leather binding still in fair condition. Printed in Germany, the text is in good condition but lamentably lacks 
Sussex Manuscript 
English, translated by Baron Frederic, 1597 A muddled, incomplete translation of the Latin Necro­nomicon, printed in Sussex, England, in an octavo edition. Properly known as the Cultus Maleficarum. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+5 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 21 
Study: 36 weeks 
Suggested Spells: same as Al Azif, but possibly danger­ously flawed in form and intent. 
People of the Monolith 
English, by Justin Geoffrey, 1926 
A volume of poems, 4" x6.75", bound in dark red buckram at Erebus Press, Monmouth, Illinois, in an edition of 1200 cop­ies. The title poem is acknowledged as Geoffrey’s masterwork. 
Sanity Loss: 1D3 
seven different leaves, each cut away and removed with great care. This volume was among the three libraries of books bequeathed to the people of England that led to the founding of the British Museum in 1753. 
The copy found in the Bibliothèque Nationale is in poor condition, bound in the cheap, crumbling pasteboards common to the era. The text is in similarly bad condition, with many torn pages and several pages missing altogether. Other pages are indecipherable, badly stained by what some identify as blood. The acquisition of the book is shrouded in mystery, the volume deposited at the front desk in 1811 by a furtive man of foreign caste. The mysterious donor was found a day later in a rat-infested apartment, a victim of poison. 
The University of Buenos Aires’ copy is said to have come to South America in the late 17th century. Although the text is in only fair condition, it is unique for its odd marginal notes, written in unknown glyphs. 
The Widener Library at Harvard contains a Necronomicon of poor condition. Its binding is original, but badly cracked and split. The text is complete but many pages have separated and others are crumbling. Restoration efforts are underway. The book was part of the library of Harry Elkins Widener, American millionaire, and it is said that he obtained the vol­ume shortly before he boarded the Titanic in 1912. 
The copy at Miskatonic University was obtained late in the last century by a young Dr. Armitage, then only recently hired by the school. Purchased from the private collection of Providence businessman Whipple Phillips, the Miskatonic’s edition of the Necronomicon was rebound, probably in the early 18th century, in sumac-tanned goatskin. A false title, Qanoon-e-Islam, is embossed in gold on the front cover. The text is complete and in fair to good condition. 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+2 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 9 
Study: 1 week 
Suggested Spells: none 
Pnakotic Manuscripts 
English, author and translator unknown, 15th century 
Five bound manuscript versions of this book are catalogued in Europe and America. The apparent precursor volume, the Pnakotica, was written in classical Greek, and that book may trace its origins to the pre-human crinoids who seeded life on Earth. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+7 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 30 
Study: 45 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Contact Winged Thing (Elder Thing). 
Ponape Scripture 
English, by Captain Abner Ezekiel Hoag, 1734. 
Published posthumously c. 1795, in Boston, as a sextodeci­mo, 4" x 6.75", but inferior in accuracy and completeness to Hoag’s manuscript, copies of which purportedly still exist. Details a South Sea islander cult of humans who worship and breed with the deep ones. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+4 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 15 
Study: 10 weeks 
Suggested Spells: the printed version has no spells. The manuscript original contains Contact Deep One, Contact Father Dagon, Contact Mother Hydra. 
Revelations Of Gla'aki R’lyeh Text 

Chinese, author unknown, c. 300 BC 
Supposedly the clay tablet originals have been destroyed, but scroll copies and recent English and German translations are said to exist. The text apparently concerns Dagon, Hy­dra, star-spawn, Zoth-Ommog, Ghatanothoa, and Cthulhu, and tells of the sinking of Mu and R’lyeh. 
Sanity Loss: 2D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 45 
Study: 54 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call Cyaegha, Contact Deity/Cthulhu, Contact Deep Ones, Contact Father Dagon, Contact Mother Hydra, Curse of the Stone, Grasp of Cthul­
hu, Wave of Oblivion. 
English, by various authors, 1842 
Nine folio volumes were published by subscription, the last in 1865. Since then, three more volumes are said to have been composed and privately circulated. Copies of the original nine folio volumes are held by many major libraries. Each volume is by a different cultist, discussing a different aspect of Gla'aki, associated entities, and their cults. This version of the text was apparently expurgated, but much information survives. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 45 
Study: 32 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Call/Dismiss Daoloth, Call/Dismiss Shub-Niggurath, Contact Deity (Eihort), Contact Deity (Gla'aki), Green De­cay, Summon/Bind Being from Xiclotl. 

Seven Cryptical Books of Hsan 
Chinese, written by Hsan the Greater, c. 2nd century AD 
Seven scrolls, each on a different topic. An English trans­lation, Seven Cryptical Books of Earth, is said to exist. The books discuss elements of the Mythos of particular impor­tance or interest to those who live in the Middle Kingdom. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+6 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 24 
Study: 40 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call Down Spirit (Summon/Bind Byakhee), Call Forth the Earth Spirit (Contact Ch­thonian), Contact Ghoul, Contact Hound of Tin­dalos, Contact Deity/Nyarlathotep, Door to Kadath (a Gate to Kadath), Restore Life (Resurrection). 

Thaumaturgical Prodigies In The New-England Canaan 
English, by Rev. Ward Phillips, 1788? 
Published in two editions, the second in Boston, 1801. Prim­itive American octavo in imitation black letter. The interiors of the editions are the same, except for changes in printer, place of printing and edition date. Commonly found in ma­jor libraries and historical society libraries in New England. Describes the blasphemies of witches, warlocks, shamans, and other Colonial-era evildoers. Details of events in and around Billington’s Woods. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+3 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 12 
Study: 8 weeks 
Suggested Spells: none, but annotations by Rev. Phillips in his personal copy reveal Call/Dismiss Ithaka (Ithaqua), Contact Deity/Narlato (Nyarlathotep), Contact Deity/Sadogowah (Tsathoggua), Contact Deity/Yogge Sothyothe (Yog-Sothoth), Elder Sign. 
True Magick 
English, by Theophilus Wenn, 17th century 
A small and crumbling hand-bound manuscript, nonetheless describable as a veritable encyclopedia of Devil’s lore. Sanity Loss: 1D8 
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+4 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 18 
Study: 24 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call for Spirit of the Air (Summon/ Bind Star Vampire), Call Forth the One (Summon/ Bind Servitor of the Outer Gods), Call Forth the Winged One (Summon/Bind Byakhee), Speak with the Dark One (Contact Deity/Nyogtha). 
Zanthu Tablets 
English, by Prof. Harold Hadley Copeland, 1916 
A brochure subtitled “A Conjectural Translation” printed in 400 copies. Translates carvings found on black jade tablets drawn up from the Pacific Ocean by fishermen. The author claims the carvings are hieratic Naacal, the high language of ancient Mu. The brochure describes the worship of Ghatan­othoa, Shub-Niggurath, and Cthulhu. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+2 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 9 
Study: 8 weeks 
Suggested Spells: the text is partially expurgated and contains no spells. The original Muvian tables con­tain Contact Deity/Cthulhu, Ghatanothoa, Lloigor, Yuggya, and Zoth-Ommog. 
Occult Books 
Owners of Mythos tomes are likely also to own occult (non-Mythos) volumes. 
An occult book usually adds at least one point to the Occult skill after reading. There are thousands of occult volumes. Here is a small sampling for Keepers to use on the bookshelves of libraries, collectors and cults. 
Reading an occult book usually costs no Sanity. Oth­erwise the same rules apply to occult books as to Mythos books. No indication for time of reading has been given; the Keeper should assign the relative interval he or she deems appropriate to the book. 
Keepers are free to add a Mythos spell in a margin or on a flyleaf (written the crabbed handwriting of some scholar or cultist) if they think it appropriate, but (except for the Malleus Maleficarum) the tone of these volumes is often anything but evil or dangerous. 
Beatus Methodivo 
Latin, attributed to St. Methodius of Olympus, c. 300 AD 
Of Gnostic complexion, this relatively short work is writ­ten as a prophetic apocalypse. It foresees the history of the world. It recounts how Seth sought a new country in the East and came to the country of the initiates, how the children of Cain instituted a system of black magic in India. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +2 percentiles 
The Emerald Tablet 
Many languages, apparently from a Phoenician original, au­thor or authors unknown, c. 200 AD 
The central alchemical text for medieval Europe, mercifully short but as cryptic and allusive as the Tao Te Ching of clas­sical China. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +1 percentile. 
The Golden Bough 
English, by Sir George Frazer, 1890, in two volumes. 
An expanded thirteen-volume edition was published 1911-1915. A classic work of anthropology exploring the evolution of magical, religious, and scientific thought. An abridged version is available in most U.S. libraries. 
Sanity Loss: 1D2 
Occult: +5 percentiles 
I Ching 
Classical Mandarin and many translations, including English (circa 2000 BC onwards, modern English translations avail­able) 
One of the five classics of Confucian China. A subtle and poetical system of divination easily applied but capable of deep situational allusion. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +8 percentiles 
Isis Unveiled 
English, by Madame Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, 1877 
A two-volume set comprising the author’s response to materialism and the arrogance of contemporary religious and scientific communities. The contents (to name but a few) also include sections on mesmerism, psychometry, the beings who inhabit ethereal space and talismans. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +6 percentiles 
The Key of Solomon 
Various languages from Latin original, 14th century AD 
Claimed to be written by King Solomon. Composed of two books, the first indicating how to avoid drastic mistakes when dealing with spirits and the second discussing the magical arts, including many complex rituals. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +5 percentiles 
Malleus Maleficarum 
Various languages from Latin, by Sprenger and Kramer, 1486 AD 
Also known as the “Hammer of Witches”. A guide for inquisitors in the Middle Ages on the identification and torturous persuasion of witches. This terrible book helped send approximately nine million people to their deaths. 

The German translation of 1906 has the excellent title Der Hexenhammer. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +3 percentiles 

Oracles of Nostradamus 
Various languages, by Michel de Nostradame [Nostradamus], 1555-1557 
Contains about a thousand four-line verses, purporting to be prophecies concerning human events until the year 3797 AD. The prophecies are nonspecific and imagistic, lending themselves to all sorts of applications. Numerous interpre­tations have been made for many of these prophecies. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +1 percentile 

The Witch-Cult in Western Europe 
English, by Dr. Margaret Murray, 1921 
A modern English octavo with dust jacket; many editions and printings since. Connects the so-called covens of the Middle Ages with pre-Christian beliefs surviving as super­stitions or, in a more organized sense, driven underground by the Church. This volume is often found in libraries and bookstores. 
Sanity Loss: none 
Occult: +1 percentile 

The Zohar 
Aramaic, many editions and translated to Latin, German, English, French, etc., by Moses de Leon, 1280 AD 
The fundamental work of medieval Jewish mystical thought, representing the effort to know or to reach God through contemplation and revelation. 
Sanity Loss: 1/1D3+1 
Occult: +7 percentiles. 



Key 

Title—Name of the book. Language—Language the book is predominantly written in. Date—Date when book was written (if known). Author—Book’s writer (if known). Wks.—Number of weeks required for full study. SAN—Sanity points loss from reading the book. CMI—Cthulhu Mythos Initial – number of Cthulhu Mythos skill points gained from an initial reading. CMF—Cthulhu Mythos Full – number of Cthulhu Mythos skill points gained from a full study. MR—Mythos Rating – reader may gain maximum CMF if their Cthulhu Mythos skills points are below the book’s rating (see page @@). 

Table XI: Mythos Tomes  
Title  Language  Date  Author  Wks.  SAN  CMI  CMF  MR  
Al-Azif  Arabic  c. 730  Abdul al-Hazrad  68  2D10  +6  +12  54  
Azathoth and Others  English  1919  Edward Derby  1  1D4  +1  +3  12  
Black Book of the Skull  Greek  J’cak Igguratian  29  1D8  +2  +4  18  
Black God of Madness  English  1930s  Amadaeus Carson  7  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Black Rites  Egyptian  Luveh-Keraphf  41  2D6  +3  +8  33  
Black Sutra  Burmese  c. 700  U Pao  18  1D8  +1  +4  15  
Black Tome  Latin  Alsophocus  37  2D6  +3  +7  30  
Book of Dzyan  English  unknown  14  1D6  +3  +6  27  
Book of Eibon  English  15th C.  unknown  32  2D4  +3  +8  33  
Book of Iod  ancient  unknown  51  2D6  +4  +8  36  
tongue  
Book of Iod  English trans.  Johann Negus  10  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Book of Skelos  Aklo  unknown  54  2D6  +3  +7  30  
Cabala of Saboth  Greek  1686  unknown  16  1D6  +1  +2  9  
Celaeno Fragments  English  1915  Laban Shrewsbury  15  1D8  +3  +6  27  
Chronike von Nath  German  Rudolf Yergler  22  1D8  +2  +4  18  
Confessions of the Mad Monk  Latin  c. 400  Clithanus  29  2D6  +3  +6  27  
Clithanus  
Cthaat Aquadingen  English  14th C.  unknown  29  2D4  +2  +4  18  
Cthaat Aquadingen  Latin  11-12th C.  unknown  46  2D8  +4  +9  39  
Cthulhu in the Necronomicon  English  1915  Laban Shrewsbury  14  1D6  +2  +4  18  
Cthonic Revelations  Laotian  Thanang Phram  18  1D8  +2  +5  21  
Cultes des Goules  French  1702  Francois-Honore  22  1D10  +4  +8  36  
Balfour  
Daemonolatreia  English  1595  Remigius  28  1D8  +2  +6  24  
De Vermiis Mysteriis  Latin  1542  Ludwig Prinn  48  2D6  +4  +8  36  
Dhol Chants  German  1890s  Heinrich Zimmer­ 17  1D8  +2  +5  21  
man  

Title  Language  Date  Author  Wks  SAN  CMI  CMF  MR  
Dwellers in the Depths  French  Gaston Le Fé  12  1D8  +2  +6  24  
Eltdown Shards  English  1912  Arthur B Win­ 6  1D8  +3  +8  33  
ters-Hall  
Ethics of Ygor  Latin  unknown  13  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Fischbuch  German  1598  Konrad von Gerner  8  1D4  +1  +2  9  
Fourth Book of D’harsis  English  D’harsis  42  2D6  +3  +8  33  
Geph Transcriptions  English  unknown  20  1D8  +2  +5  21  
G’harne Fragments  English  Amery Wen­ 12  1D10  +3  +7  30  
dy-Smith  
Ghorl Nigral  Muvian  Naacal Zakuba  46  2D8  +4  +10  42  
Green Book  English  unknown  50  2D8  +4  +9  39  
Hydrophinnae  Latin  Mr. Gantley  7  1D4  +1  +2  9  
Ilarnek Papyri  English  unknown  15  1D8  +2  +4  18  
In Pressured Places  English  Hartrack  3  1D6  +1  +4  15  
Invocations to Dagon  English  Asaph Waite  16  1D8  +3  +6  27  
Johansen Narrative  English  Gustaf Johansen  6  1D6  +1  +3  12  
King in Yellow, The  English  1895  unknown  1  1D10  +1  +4  15  
Legends of Liqualia  English  Oswald  9  1D4  +1  +3  12  
Liber Damnatus  English  1647  Janus Aquaticus  34  1D8  +3  +7  30  
Damnationum  
Liber Ivonis  Latin  9th C.  Caius Phillipus  36  2D4  +4  +9  39  
Life of Eibon  French  Cyron  8  1D4  +1  +2  9  
Livre D’Ivon  French  13th C.  Gaspard du Nord  36  2D4  +4  +8  36  
Magic and the Black Arts  English  Kane  12  1D6  +1  +4  15  
Marvels of Science  English  Morryster  11  1D4  +1  +2  9  
Massa di Requiem  Italian  1768  B Chieti Brodighera  2  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Per Shuggay  
Monstres and their Kynde  English  16th C.  unknown  36  1D8  +2  +6  24  
Mum-Rath Papyri  Latin  Ibn Shoddathua  10  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Naacal Key  English  Churchward  2  1D2  0  +1  3  
Nameless Cults  English  1845  unknown  48  2D8  +4  +8  36  
Nameless Cults  English  1909  unknown  30  2D8  +3  +6  27  
Necrolatry  German  1702  Ivor Gorstadt  20  2D6  +4  +8  36  
Necronomicon  Greek  c. 950  Theodoras Philetas  68  2D10  +5  +12  51  
Necronomicon  Latin  1228  Olaus Wormius  66  2D10  +5  +11  48  
Necronomicon  English  1586  John Dee  50  2D10  +5  +10  45  
Night-Gaunt  English  Edgar Gordon  4  1D3  0  +1  3  
The Occult Foundation  English  c. 1980  J. C. Wassermann  16  1D6  +1  +4  15  
Of Evil Sorceries Done in New  English  c.1600  unknown  9  1D6  +1  +3  12  
England  
Othuum Omnicia  Latin  unknown  12  1D4  +1  +2  9  
Parchments of Pnom  Hyperborean  Pnom  31  2D6  +3  +8  33  
People of the Monolith  English  1926  Justin Geoffrey  1  1D3  +1  +2  9  
Pnakotic Manuscripts  English  15th C.  unknown  45  1D8  +3  +7  30  
Polynesian Mythology,  English  1906  Harold H.  8  1D3  +1  +2  9  
with a Note on the Cthulhu  Copeland  
Legend-Cycle  
Title  Language  Date  Author  Wks  SAN  CMI  CMF  MR  
Ponape Scripture  1734  Abner Ezekiel  10  1D6  +1  +4  15  
Prehistoric Pacific in the Light  
of the Ponape Scripture  English  1911  Harold H.  7  1D4  +1  +3  12  
Copeland  
Prehistory in the Pacific: A  English  1902  Harold H.  4  1D2  0  +1  3  
Preliminary Investigation  Copeland  
Reflections  English  Ibn Schacabao  27  1D8  +2  +6  24  
Remnants of Lost Empires  German  1809  Otto Dostmann  5  1D3  0  +2  6  
Revelations of Gla'aki  English  1842  various authors  32  2D6  +5  +10  45  
Revelations of Hali  English  1913  E. S. Bayrolles  5  1D4  +1  +3  12  
R’lyeh Text  Chinese  c. 300  unknown  54  2D8  +5  +10  45  
Saducismus Triumphatus  English  1681  Joseph Glanvill  6  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Sapientia Maglorum  Latin  Ostanes  40  2D6  +3  +7  30  
Saracenic Rituals  English  19th C.  Clergyman X  6  1D3  +1  +2  9  
Secret Mysteries of Asia, with a  German  1847  Gottfried Mulder  16  1D8  +2  +5  21  
Commentary on the  
Ghorl Nigral  
Secret Watcher, The  English  Halpin Chalmers  10  1D4  +1  +3  12  
Seven Cryptical Books of Hsan  Chinese  2nd C.  Hsan the Greater  40  1D8  +2  +6  24  
Song of Yste  Greek  Dirka Family  11  1D6  +1  +4  15  
Soul of Chaos  English  Edgar Gordon  7  1D4  +1  +3  12  
Sussex Manuscript  English  1597  Baron Frederic  36  1D6  +2  +5  21  
Testament of Carnamagos  Greek  12th C.  Carnamagos  23  1D6  +2  +4  18  
Thaumaturgical Prodigies in the  English  1788  Ward Philips  8  1D6  +1  +3  12  
New English Canaan  
True Magick  English  17th C.  Theophilus Wenn  24  1D8  +2  +4  18  
Tunneler Below, The  English  1936  Georg Reuter  2  1D3  +1  +2  9  
Tuscan Rituals  Italian  unknown  3  1D3  0  +2  6  
Unausprechlichen Kulten  German  1839  F W von Junzt  52  2D8  +5  +10  45  
Unter Zee Kulten  German  17th C.  Graf Gauberg  17  1D6  +2  +4  18  
Uralteschrecken  German  19th C.  Graf von Konnen­ 22  1D6  +2  +4  18  
berg  
Visions from Yaddith  English  1927  Ariel Prescott  1  1D4  +1  +3  12  
Von denen Verdammten Oder  German  Karaj Heinz Vogel  24  2D6  +4  +8  36  
Von denen Verdammten  German  1907  Edith Brendall  10  1D6  +1  +4  15  
(repr.)  
Watchers on the Other Side  English  1940s  Nayland Colum  2  1D4  0  +3  9  
We Pass from View  English  1964  Roland Franklyn  1  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Yhe Ritual  Egyptian  Niggoum-Zhog  14  1D8  +3  +6  27  
Yuggya Chants  English  Unknown  11  1D6  +1  +3  12  
Zanthu Tablets  



I say to you againe, doe not call up Any that you can not put downe; by the Which I meane, Any that can in Turne call up Somewhat against you, whereby your Powerfullest Devices may not be of use. Ask of the Lesser, lest the Greater shal not wish to Answer, and shal commande more than you. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Case Of Charles Dexter Ward 


Spells 
he spells described within the Grimoire are listed alphabetically, each detailing the ‘stan­dard’ purpose and result of a successful casting. Keepers are encouraged to further develop, alter 

and enhance the spells listed here. A spell may be found in a tome that produces a weaker effect than that stated in the Grimoire; equally, more powerful versions may be encountered. 
The Keeper should modify spells according to the needs of a particular scenario or campaign. Care should be taken when creating more powerful versions of the spells and putting them into the hands of the investigators. Such de­vices often unbalance the game and it should be noted that spell-craft is the realm of insane wizards steeped in the lore of the Mythos. Spells should never be considered mundane within the world of the game. These are not superpowers to be used lightly by investigators and meddling with such otherworldly forces is likely to cripple the unwary user in both mind and body. Further advice on how to alter spells is offered in Spell Variations (see page @@). 
The Keeper should take careful note of which investigators know magic. An investigator  might cast a spell involuntarily whilst under the Keeper’s control during a bout of madness. 
Spell names 
While each spell has a standard name, Keepers are strongly advised to use more evocative titles wherever possible. Dif­ferent Mythos tomes may contain common spells; however, such authors will have comprehended the spells quite dif­ferently, one author naming the spell Contact Deep One as ‘The Voice from the Deeps’ for example, and another calling it Summon the Abyssal Foulness’. Different spells may even have the same or similar names. Suggestions for alternative names are provided at the end of each spell’s description. 
Deeper Magic 
The path to Mythos wisdom and knowledge leads to insanity. Sanity gauges a person’s hold on what we term ‘reality’, which is not reality at all but only a consensual human delusion or lim­ited understanding that protects the mind from that which it cannot fully comprehend: the Cthulhu Mythos. Mythos magic is antithetical and corrosive to human sanity; the casting of spells will eat away at sanity, gradually disintegrating the caster’s link to the human world until the day comes when the Mythos is all that remains. A cultist’s ultimate aim is to relinquish all trace of human sanity and replace it with an understanding of the true nature of the universe. The loss of all sanity would in­capacitate most people, leaving them unable to function in any meaningful way. However some cultists achieve this paradigm shift without being reduced to gibbering wrecks; even though they have zero Sanity points, they somehow transcend insanity and are still able to function and, in some cases, are capable of blending unnoticed with society at large. 
Insane wizards, who fully embrace the Mythos, are likely to draw upon far greater power than a person who is simply cast­ing a spell learnt from a book. Liberated from human sanity and empowered by their understanding of the Mythos, these wizards are able to discover new aspects and deeper magics. In­vestigators may also learn these deeper levels of understanding. Whenever an investigator is insane (temporary or indefinite) and successfully casts a spell, roll 1D100 and compare the result with the investigator’s Cthulhu Mythos skill. If the roll is equal to or below the investigator’s skill, new depths of magic have been successfully plumbed and the option to use the deeper effect of the spell now presents itself. Once the deeper version of a spell is discovered, it remains available thereafter. Whether there are further deeper levels of the spell to be discovered in the future is a matter for the Keeper to decide. 
All spells have these hidden depths. Deeper versions of many spells in this Grimoire are provided as examples. Keepers are advised to plan ahead when introducing spells that might fall into the hands of investigators and predetermine possible deeper magical effects of such spells rather than try to invent them on the fly. 
Deeper Magic in Play 
All Mythos entities and cultists with zero Sanity points will, if they know a certain spell, also know the deeper versions as listed in the Grimoire. Other enemies may know them at the Keeper’s discretion. The Keeper should not feel obliged to roll to determine whether the enemy learns a deeper version during play. 
When an investigator discovers a deeper effect of a spell through play, the Keeper may decide how it differs from the standard version. The section on Spell Variations may prove useful. Essentially the deeper version should be an exciting (and more horrific) development of the spell rather than a mundane mechanical benefit (such as the spell costing fewer magic points). You may ask the player how the spell might be altered; remember however that this is a horror game, and the deeper version may add aspects to the spell that are undesirable to the investigator. Greater magic should come with a greater price. 
Spell variations 
There is no such thing as a definitive spell. The ones listed here are only a guide and starting point for the Keeper to draw upon. This is not a game in which the players can ex­pect their characters to gain spells as a matter of course. The players should be aware that any spells their investigators gain may vary from the ones listed in this book. Part of the Keeper’s job is to act as intermediary between this Grimoire and the players. 

Making alterations to listed spells 
A spell is made up of three parts: a cost, a description and an effect. Cost and effect have a direct mechanical  impact on the game that may include sanity loss, physical damage, loss of magic points, permanent change to characteristics and so forth. You are free to alter these things, although some careful consideration is required; placing a cheap, powerful spell in to the hands of the players can have a dramatic effect upon play. Description, on the other hand, is simply dra­matic color and can be changed with relative ease. 
Opposed POW rolls 
Many spells call for a POW roll to be made to test whether the spell affects its target. Both sides make a POW roll and compare their levels of success, with the higher one being the victor. In the case of a tie, highest POW wins; if the sides are still drawn, the Keeper might decide that both are affected adversely in some manner that reflects the nature of the spell. If the difference between the caster’s POW and the target’s POW is 100 or more, the one with the greater POW automatically wins. 
Spell range 
In the game, spell range is usually one of three options: touch, 100 yards or sight with the unaided eye. These general choices are easy to visualize and understand. Greater ranges can become engineering problems, not examples of horror. 
Casting time and spells in combat 
Some spells are useful in combat situations. Each spell has a casting time listed in its description: instantaneous, 1 round and so on. 
If the casting time is instantaneous, it activates on the user’s DEX+50 (just like a readied gun). 
If the casting takes one round, it activates on the user’s DEX in the present round. 
If the casting takes two rounds, it activates on the user’s DEX in the following round, and so on. 
Altering a spell’s costs and effects 
The spell cost is usually gauged in magic points and Sanity points; however, some cases (where an effect is long-lasting and/or highly significant) may also include a permanent expenditure of POW. When altering the cost, you should consider any changes you intend to make to the effect. A more powerful effect is likely to increase the cost, whilst a lesser effect may lower it. 

The source from which a spell is learned can affect both the cost and the effect; the purer the source, the better the spell. There is no set ratio of spell cost to effect in this game. A poorer source, such as a badly translated and incomplete tome, may provide a lesser version of a spell with a reduced effect and increased cost. A spell imparted directly from a Great Old One to the mind of a character might have greatly increased effects and/or greatly reduced costs. 
Altering a spell 
Try to insert some personal touches to the spell, tying it more strongly to your scenario, investigators and story, if possible. 
Location: consider the locations in your story; could one of them be linked to the spell? If the investigators are dealing with ghouls, for example, a spell that must be cast underground suddenly takes on an added dimension. 
Spell components: the specific items required to cast the spell. Could it be that the investigators need the curved silver dagger they saw in the previous session at the British Museum? 
Spell ritual: a greater spell effect usually means a more complex and involved ritual. Consider where, when and how the spell is cast. Do the investigators have to daub themselves in blood at the full moon and inscribe a ritual circle? 
Spell description: this can range from subtle to dramatic. Try to imbue the description with strange smells, disorient­ing visions, curious sounds and disturbing sensations—re­member that most of these spells erode the caster’s sanity, and the way in which you describe the casting should make this manifest. 
An example of one spell with variations 
A spell could be compared with a cookery recipe. There is no definitive bread recipe; soda bread can be made in an hour whilst sourdough bread takes days. A variety of flours and other ingredients may be used. The methods of making can vary; it can be done by hand or with a machine. The resulting breads come in all shapes, sizes and flavors. If you look at ten cookery books, you will find many differing rec­ipes for bread with many different names. The same is true for spells and tomes. 
Ten tomes might list what appears at first glance to be the same spell; however, the specific spells will be no more similar than all those bread recipes—there is a world of difference between German black bread and focaccia. Just as you would choose a bread that suits your menu, so you may tailor a spell to fit your game. Let’s take the spell Create Zombie and look at a few variations. 
The basic Create Zombie spell 
The Create Zombie spell in the Grimoire starts with a corpse and coverts it to a zombie. The zombie lasts until it rots or falls to pieces. It can take basic commands from its creator. The magic point cost is high (16 points) and the Sanity loss (1D6) moderate. The spell takes a whole week, but will work and is not subject to any POW rolls. 
A quick and dirty version of the Create Zom­bie spell 
It is conceivable that the players might wish to make a zombie, perhaps to carry out some dangerous task on their behalf. If the investigators come across a tome that is poorly transcribed, incomplete or damaged, you might want to provide them with a version of the spell which seems useful, but is likely to cause them more trouble than it is worth. 
Alternatively you might want to kick a scenario off with a Re-animator theme: a mad doctor bringing corpses back to life, only to find they are beyond control. The cost of such a spell might be halved, as it is far less useful than the standard version. The idea of starting with a corpse that continues to rot is retained, as is the sanity loss, yet the casting time is re­duced to one hour. The apparent advantage of faster casting and lower magic point cost might well appeal to the unwary. Let’s call this version of the spell ‘Grey Binding’. 
An improved version of the Create Zombie spell 
What if a warlock had the original Create Zombie spell, but wanted a more effective servant, one that would last longer, one that might even pass for human? The warlock’s aim might be beneficent; he may even be trying to bring back a loved one, such as a wife or child. 
All this would of course raise the cost of the spell and, as it is longer-lasting, the cost might be in POW instead of magic points—let’s call it 5 POW. The Sanity cost might also 

Grey Binding           (Create Zombie variant) Cost: 8 magic points; 1D6 Sanity points Casting time: 1 hour 
A ritual liquid must be poured over a prepared corpse. The ingredients of the liquid differ depending on the version of the spell; however, the blood of the sorcerer appears common to all. Other ingredients should be determined by the Keeper (at least one should be costly or illegal, or perhaps radioactive). Immediately after, the caster intones the spell. 
Following the ritual, the corpse rouses. Literally mindless, the zombie is akin to a wild animal and is not under the control of its creator. 
The thing continues to rot after its creation and so eventually decays into incapacity. 
be raised to 1D10, justified in the description of the spell casting as invoking Mythos gods and the requirement of the caster to breathe part of his or her own ‘life force’ in to the corpse. The casting time is not important and is reduced to one day, but it could just as well remain at one week. This zombie will follow simple commands and may even slowly learn more over time. The zombie’s life is linked to the caster and it will become inactive and rot away should its master die. 
Let’s call this spell ‘The Graveyard Kiss’ to evoke what might be its kinder, albeit misplaced, intentions. 

Graveyard Kiss (Create Zombie variant) Cost: 5 POW; 1D10 Sanity points Casting time: 1 day The spell requires a human corpse that retains suffi­cient flesh to allow mobility after activation. The caster puts an ounce of his or her own blood in the mouth of the corpse, then kisses the lips of the corpse and “breathes part of the self” into the body. Five points of POW are lost, a gift to the corpse. 
If the spell succeeds, the caster may give the zombie simple commands that it will carry out. Over time the zombie may learn to accept more complex commands. Should the caster die, the zombie becomes inactive and rots away. Part of the invocation refers collectively to the Mythos Gods—though no specific names are used. 
Deeper version 

It is rumored that some may be able to create and con­trol unlimited undead servants, with some suggesting that a sorcerer’s POW sets the limit for the number of zombies that can be controlled. 
Divide the caster’s POW by five; the result is the maximum number of zombies that may be actively controlled at any given time. 
Alternative names: The Deathless Servant, Love’s Lost Embrace Returned 


A macabre version of the Create Zombie spell: 
If you want an altogether more evil version of the spell— one that involves the capture and murder of an innocent person, perhaps a friend of an investigator or even an actual investigator—then something must be altered to allow the spell to begin with a living target. 
First the target would have to be captured, and one obvious way to capture and subdue a target is with poison. This spell is intended to have an evil feel, so the target is then buried alive for a few days. Later the victim is converted to a zombie to serve its master for so long as the caster lives or wishes. This is an evil spell involving murder and torture, thus the Sanity cost is increased to 10 points. The fact that this spell does not so much animate a corpse as corrupt a living person is deemed justification to decrease the magic 

Create Zombi (Create Zombie variant) Cost: 10 magic points; 10 Sanity points Casting time: variable (days) The target is brought to near death by a paralyzing powder made from blowfish innards and alkaloids. This poison must be inhaled. The target must then succeed in an Extreme CON roll (equal to or under one­fifth CON) to resist the poison. On a failure the target falls into a deep trance indistinguishable from death. Horribly, the target is still conscious but incapable of movement. The victim is put in a coffin and buried alive in the cemetery. A small tube connects the coffin to the surface so that he or she may breathe. During this time, the unfortunate target of the spell must pass a Sanity roll every three game hours or lose 1D6 SAN. If the target goes insane during this period, he or she embraces the will of the sorcerer, grateful that the terror of the grave has been dispelled. 
Three nights later, the caster comes to the gravesite and casts Create Zombi. If the caster perceives mental resistance from the target, an opposed POW roll (see page @@) roll is made between the caster and target. Whether the target is sane or insane, success with the spell drains away all but 1 POW. If the spell fails, the caster may simply cover up the breathing hole and leave the victim to suffocate. 
With a successful casting, the sorcerer has created a zombie servant, able to obey simple commands. The unfortunate zombie remains under the spell of the sorcerer, until such a time as the zombie is released— usually meaning the true death of the victim or the death of its master. 


point cost from 16 to 10. The spell still takes a number of days to cast, and the resulting zombie is still only able to follow basic commands. 
Because this spell targets a living person there should be some way to oppose it. Two rolls may be used, first a CON roll to resist the poison and second a POW roll to resist the effects of the spell.  This variant might only have the subtly different name of ‘Create Zombi’. 
Creating a new spell 
Call of Cthulhu is not a game that strives for game balance between the player characters and their enemies. Nor is there a level-based structure into which spells must fit. If, for example, you create a spell that is similar to one in the Grimoire, but which costs less for greater effect, you have not contravened any rules. You should be wary of introduc­ing elements (such as spells) into your game that may have a major effect on game play. This is not to say that you should not do so, just that you should not do so thoughtlessly. 
Look at the spells in this book and find one that approx­imates the magnitude of effect of your new spell. This will provide a starting point as to the cost in magic points, POW and Sanity points. 
Consider how easy the spell will be to cast. A caster might have 16 magic points and be able to burn some hit points to increase this number to, let’s say, 25. Beyond this, the caster will either require a reservoir of magic points or additional participants in the casting to donate magic points of their own. Some spells require POW to be spent. POW can be accrued by wizards through certain spells or items, such as an enchanted cane. 
Sacrifices and other morally objectionable rites can be added to spells for two purposes. First, to evoke the theme of horror. Second, to make the spells either difficult or a moral dilemma for the players. For example, will the players want use a spell that can thwart the opposition if it requires a human sacrifice? 
Call, Contact and Summon disambig­uation 
These three spell types have much in common and it is useful to understand the differences. 
Call spells are immensely powerful rituals that bring an actual physical manifestation of a god before the caster. Call spells may be used by cults to bring forth their dark gods to accept ritual sacrifices or as an act of worship. The flip-side of the Call spell is the Dismiss spell, used to send the god back from whence it came. Dismiss spells may well prove useful to the investigators. 
Contact spells can be considered a request for commu­nication—somewhat like an esoteric telephone call. When successfully used with Mythos monsters, it will draw one or more to the caster; however, they come of their own volition and are not under the caster’s control. When used with a deity or Great Old One, the spell opens communication but does not necessarily bring forth a physical manifestation. 
Investigators might have cause to use a contact spell under certain circumstances; for example, to contact intelligent Mythos races to gain information or aid; however, to do so is perilous in the extreme. 
Summon spells compel a monster (not a god) to appear before the caster. Such monsters may be bound to caster’s will to do his or her bidding. Thus summon (and bind) spells are used by wizards and cultists who wish use the power of some otherworldly horror. Investigators might use a summon spell, but they had best ensure they can bind what they summon! 
The Grimoire 
Apportion Ka 
Cost: 10 magic points, 5 POW and 2D10 Sanity points per organ 
Casting time: 1 day per organ 
A portion of the caster’s life essence, or ‘ka’, is transferred into one of his or her vital organs. The enchanted organ is then removed from the caster’s body, to be hidden away for safekeeping and providing the wizard with a form of invul­nerability—as long as the enchanted organ remains safely hidden the wizard will not suffer particular attacks and may even be invulnerable to death. 
This spell was first used by followers of the Dark Pha­raoh, Nephren-Ka, who would remove a vital organ, such as the heart or liver, and lock them away in safe places. This would make the caster virtually impossible to kill, if not for the spell’s one weakness. The brain is the seat of the spell’s power and, as such, could not be removed. If the brain was destroyed, the other organs would lose their magical prop­erties and the caster would die. 
Having one’s own insides removed costs 2D10 Sanity points and the permanent loss of 5 POW per organ removed. Attacks that impale cause only normal damage (unless the head is specifically targeted). Invulnerability stems from which organ is removed; for example if the lungs are re­moved then the caster is unaffected by lack of oxygen (thus drowning and suffocation are no longer threats). Removal of vital organs may also render the caster immune to poison and so forth. 
If the caster is harmed, hit points should be reduced as usual, leading to unconsciousness but not death. Death will only occur if the brain is specifically targeted and destroyed. 
Alternative names: Imbue Essence, Extraction of the Will, The Deathless Breath. 
Banishment of Yde Etad 
Cost: 1D4+3 magic points per caster; 1D4 Sanity points each Casting time: variable (minimum 1 hour) 
This spell sends home most trans-dimensional human or human-like intelligences that are under their own volition. It is not effective against any creature commanded by an­other intelligence. Correctly performed, the banishment is permanent and irrevocable. Each banishment is of an individual target, not of a type of monsters. 
At least three people must participate in the spell. All participants must know the spell. More participants add to the effectiveness; however, the total number of participants must be divisible by three. 
This banishment works by destroying with ritual flames a sigil representing the target. The target’s personal sigil is best, but a substitute can be prepared according to a formula described within the spell. For the spell to take effect an op­posed POW roll must be made between the caster with the highest POW and target. One bonus die is granted for each additional set of three casters. 
The spell must be performed in the open air in the middle of the night, ideally in a place of power associated with the target. This could be known haunts, its last known location or its point of entry into this dimension. The spell casters must divide their numbers: one-third remain outside a protective circle and the rest stand within. 
Alternative names: Banish Spawn of the Seven Hells, Cast Out Demon, Curse of Awful Fire. 
Bind spells, see Summoning Spells (page @@) 
Bless Blade 
Cost: 5 POW; 1D4 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 hour 
Creates a blade capable of damaging or killing entities that cannot be harmed by mundane weapons. Requires the blood sacrifice of an animal of at least SIZ 50. The blade of the knife must be of an elemental metal such as iron or sil­ver. The blade may be of any size; however, larger blades do greater damage(see Table XVII: Weapons, pages @@-@@). 
If the blade is broken, melted or otherwise damaged it permanently loses this ability; however, it will not be harmed in attacks against supernatural entities. 
Alternative names: Imbue Might of the Elder Ones, Ritual of the Seven Cuts, Spirit’s Bane. 
Body Warping of Gorgoroth 
Cost: 6+ magic points; 5 POW; 2D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1D6+4 minutes 
Allows the caster to change his or her physical form. The sorcerer can change to any shape and appearance, though retaining personal abilities. The form is fleshly but it can appear to be made of stone, wood, a rug, etc. Once changed into a new shape, the caster has the mobility of that shape. 
The caster’s STR, CON, INT, POW and DEX do not change. 

Brew Space-Mead 
If emulating a person, the sorcerer’s Appearance becomes that of the individual emulated. The caster can take on only A wonderfully golden liquid, which he kept in a carafe in his a known form. 
desk and served in tiny Belgian liqueur glasses in such small 
The caster invokes Nyarlathotep and repeats the phrases 

amounts that it seemed futile even to raise it to one’s lips— 
of the spell while expending 6 magic points and an addi­
and yet its bouquet and its taste…outdid even the oldest 
tional magic point for each 5 points of SIZ to be gained or 

Chianti and the best Chateau Yquem to such an extent that 
lost in the body warping. Only one alteration per casting is possible and the effect is permanent until the spell is recast to mention them in the same breath was to do injustice to the to change back again. This spell cannot be cast on another professor’s brew. Fiery though it was, it had the additional being. 
effect of making me drowsy… 
Alternative names: Mastery of the Flesh, Skin Walking, 
—August Derleth, The House on Curwen Street 

The Black Pharaoh’s Touch. Cost: 20 magic points per dose; plus variable additional Magic and Sanity points 
Casting time: Many days 
This spell creates a magical drink that allows a human to withstand journeys through the vacuum and vicissitudes of Deeper version space. For all such journeys, the effectiveness of space-mead also requires the expenditure of an equal number of magic 
If imitating an individual, the caster becomes a replica 

points and Sanity points, commensurate to the journey’s 
of that person, including voice and speech patterns. 

distance in light years by the traveller taking the drug (see 
The caster does not need to repeat the spell to undo the 

Table XII: Space Mead Effectiveness). 
warping—a simple verbal phrase is all that is required. 

Brewing the drink and taking the journey represent sepa­rate stages for the caster/user. Different types of space-mead exist, each with the same effects but all of them requiring different ingredients. 
Brewing space-mead requires five special ingredients to be chosen by the Keeper and requires at least a week of Breath of the Deep brewing time. Once the mead is foaming and bubbling, the 
Cost: 8 magic points; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 round 
The target’s lungs fill with sea-
Table XII:                            
water, potentially causing an unpleasant death by drowning. 

Space Mead Effectiveness
The caster must be able to see the target. After mentally intoning the spell for a round, for the spell 

Magic Points and Sanity Points Distance in light years (not 
to take effect the caster must win 

(each to be expended by the to exceed...) 
an opposed POW roll with the 

traveler) 
target. If the caster wins the target 1 100

begins to drown—the target falls 2 1,000
to the floor, choking on seawater and taking 1D8 damage each 3 10,000 round. The target should make 
4 100,000
an Extreme CON roll (equal to or 5 1,000,000below one-fifth CON) after taking 

damage each round; if the roll is successful the water has been ex-* and so on: add another pair of points, add another zero. Theoretically, pelled and the effects of the spell 10 magic points and 10 Sanity points might be enough to reach any 
cease. 

point in the universe, at least as we understand the universe. 
Alternative names: Currency of the Blue Sea, The Sailor’s Curse, Kiss of Brine. 





caster must sacrifice 20 magic points per dose into the brew. These magic points may be sacrificed over many days; the more points, the more doses. Each dose allows one person to withstand one journey through space of varying distance and time. 
Once the space-mead has been enchanted, the traveller must find a means of transportation—usually a mount: among others, the spell Summon Byakhee can provide an interstellar steed. The traveller then drinks a dose (presum­ably bringing a return dose along), climbs on, commands the mount and the journey begins. It is at this point that the traveller pays the necessary magic and Sanity point cost subject for the distance being travelled. 
While in space, the travellers are in mental and physical stasis, nearly insensible to their surroundings. Upon arrival at the destination, the effects of the brew conclude. 
Alternative names: Breath of the Void, The Traveller’s Portion, The Quicksilver Draft of Blackest Night. 
Call and Dismiss Deity Spells 
Call Deity 
Cost: 1+ magic points per person; 1D10 Sanity points (cast­er only) 
Casting time: 1-100 minutes 
Call spells bring the avatar, god or Great Old One before the caster. Casting this type of spell is perilous indeed, even for cultists. Only cult priests or desperate people should choose to call a Mythos deity. A handful are cited here; however, both Call and Dismiss spells are likely to exist for every Great Old One and for every form of Mythos god. 
A group can assist by adding power to Call spells, with the caster acting as the focus for the group. Everyone pres­ent expends 1 magic point. Those who know the spell can sacrifice any number of magic points (including burning hit points). The total of the magic points spent is the percentage chance that the spell works. For each magic point spent, the group must chant for a minute, but never for more than 100 minutes. On a roll of 100 the spell will always fail with all magic points sacrificed in the spell lost. 
The caster also loses 1D10 Sanity points in casting the spell. Everyone present loses Sanity points if the deity appears. The Keeper plays the thing and must create some motivation for the thing’s behavior. Mostly, when a Mythos deity arrives on Earth, it wants to stay and is usually hungry. 
Dismiss Deity 
Cost: 1 or more magic points per person. 
Casting time: 1 minute plus 1 extra round per participant who donates POW. 
Dismiss Deity spell names 

When composing alternative names for Dismiss Deity spells, consider the following words for inspi­ration: 
Banishment  Repel  Repudiate  
Dispel  Bane  Cast Out  
Exile  Evict  

Also, try to use evocative and subtle names for the actual Mythos deities rather than simply using their common names. There’s no reason why a spell name concerning Yog-Sothoth couldn’t reference the being as The Hideous Spheres, or The Un­quenchable Thirster of Souls, and so forth. Keeping the players guessing about what a spell will do or to whom it’s connected can help to stimulate mystery and fear of the unknown 
A deity who does not want to leave Earth may be dis­missed. Every Dismiss spell differs; the caster must know the specific Dismiss spell for the particular deity. First, allot 1 magic point per 25 POW (round down) possessed by the deity. This grants an initial 5% chance to dismiss the god and it opens the way for the deity’s dismissal. 


Once the way is prepared, the sacrifice of more magic points can tempt the deity into departure. In this, the second stage, each new magic point sacrificed increases the chance that the deity leaves by 5 percentiles. Sacrificing 10 more magic points adds 50 percentiles to the chance. As with the Call Deity version of the spell, a group of people can assist one another to cast Dismiss Deity. 

Call Deity spells always require special conditions and rituals; however, the Dismiss portion of the spell can be cast anytime, anywhere. 
Call Deity spell requirements 
As mentioned, each deity requires certain conditions to be in place for the Call spell to work. Keepers should use these as inspiration but not be constrained by them for two reasons. The first reason is fiction based; no human fully understands the Cthulhu Mythos so there may be more than one way to Call a Deity. The second reason is that experi­enced players will quickly latch on to the familiar elements and the mystery will be blown. Call Azathoth: Calling this god is extremely dangerous and has the potential to fry the entire planet. The spell can be cast only outside at night; however, no other special prepa­rations are needed. 
Alternative names: Petition of Chaos, The Unspeakable Vowel of The Shaggai. Call Cthugha: Cthugha bursts into being through a flame held by the caster (a candle, torch, etc.) As the caster intones the spell, he or she moves the flame in series of patterns. The spell can be successfully cast only on clear nights when Fomalhaut (the brightest star in the Piscis Austrinus con­stellation) clears the horizon. September to November are the best nights for Fomalhaut in the Northern Hemisphere. 
Alternative names: Evocation of the Fiery Burning Doom, The Formalhaut Convention. Call Hastur: Calls the deity to nine large blocks of stone ar­ranged in a V-pattern (always a sign of cult activity!) Each of the stone blocks needs a volume of nine or more cubic yards. 
The spell can be cast only on clear nights when Aldebaran (in the constellation of Taurus) is above the horizon (roughly October to March). Each byakhee present during Call Hastur adds a further 10 percentiles to the chance for success. 
If 5 points of POW have been sacrificed into each of the stone blocks, so that all are enchanted, the stone V adds 30 percentiles to the chance to cast Summon/Bind Byakhee. 
Alternative names: The Darke Ritual of the One Who Walks in Shadow, The Yellow Petition. Call Ithaqua: Focuses the attention of Ithaqua; however, the presence of the Great Old One may be noticed only as a whirlwind or strong icy wind. The spell must be cast on an enormous mound of snow (minimum 10 feet high). Legend states that the spell may only be performed in the far north of the world, when temperatures are below freezing. Some wizards conjecture that Ithaqua might be invoked from any high, snowy mountain, even those in the South Pole. 
Alternative names: The Seven Oaths of the North Wind, Invoke the Ice God. Call Nyogtha: Invokes the favor of Nyogtha, who appears to grant a boon to the caster—if Nyogtha deems the cast­er worthy. The caster must perform the spell ritual at the entrance to any cavern (certain tomes hint that all great caverns link to the one wherein Nyogtha dwells). 
Alternative names: Petition Thy Dark Master Through the Rigorous Chanting and Wailing, Call Favor from HE which Dwells Below. 

Call Shub-Niggurath: Calls Shub-Niggurath to a conse­crated stone altar. This altar must be positioned in dank wilderness under the sky. The spell must be cast from the altar at the dark of the moon. 
Each Call of the dark goddess requires fresh blood to consecrate the altar. An altar bathed in the blood of the equivalent of 200 SIZ or more adds 20 percentiles to the chance to Call Shub-Niggurath, whilst each dark young present adds further 10 percentiles. 
Alternative names: The Sacred Rites of Union, Bring Forth The Carnal Desire of the Wood Nymph. Call Yog-Sothoth: Calls Yog-Sothoth to a specially construct­ed stone tower. The tower must be in an open area and the sky must be cloudless. The stone tower must be at least ten yards high. Each time the spell is cast, the cultists must designate a human sacrifice for the god’s taking. This need be no more than an invitation—gesturing toward a nearby village, for instance, from which Yog-Sothoth then selects a victim. 
At the cult’s option, the stone tower may be enchanted, lowering the magic points needed for a successful cast of the spell. Each point of POW infused in the tower permanently improves the total chance of casting Call Yog-Sothoth from it by 1 percentile. 
Alternative names: The Forbidden Song of the Key, The Yah-Zek Channelling. 
Cause/Cure Blindness 
Cost: 8 magic points (and 2D6 Sanity points for Cause Blindness) 
Casting time: 1 day 
The target suffers complete and permanent blindness, as if by a stroke. The same spell can reverse blindness if the eyes and optic nerves are essentially intact. The spell costs 8 magic points for either version. A day of ritual is required. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target (automatic success if the target is consenting). 
Alternative names: Grant Sight, Shade of Darkness, The Pharaoh’s Curse. 
Chant of Thoth 
Cost: 10 magic points; 1D4 Sanity points. 
Casting time: 30 minutes 
The use of this spell increases the caster’s mental faculties, boosting his or her chance of solving a particular intellectual problem. Spending 10 magic points in the chant, grants the caster a bonus die on his or her dice roll to gain knowledge, learn a spell, translate a passage, deduce the meaning of a symbol, etc. 
Alternative names: The Rite of Cerebral Acuity, The Song of Erudite Addition, The Scholars Chorus. 

Cloud Memory 
Cost: 1D6 magic points; 1D2 Sanity points 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
The spell blocks the target’s ability to consciously remember a particular event. The caster must be able to see the target and the target must be able to receive the caster’s instruc­tions. The spell takes effect immediately if the caster suc­ceeds in an opposed POW roll with the target. If the caster wins, the target’s mind is mentally blocked regarding one specified incident. If the incident was terrifying, the victim may thereafter still have nightmares vaguely relating to it. If the spell fails, the event in question becomes vivid in the target’s mind. 
The caster must know the specific event to be blocked. The caster cannot command something vague such as, “Forget what you did yesterday.” Instead, he or she must cite a certain event, such as, “Forget you were assaulted by a monster.” This spell cannot block knowledge of spells or of the Cthulhu Mythos unless the knowledge is firmly tied to a specific event, nor can it undo a Sanity loss or undo insanity. 
Alternative names: Befuddle, Dumbfound, Mystify. 
Clutch of Nyogtha 
Cost: 1+ magic points equal to twice the damage delivered that round; 1D20 Sanity points 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
The caster must spend 1 magic point to begin the spell and the target must be within conversational distance. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. If the caster wins the roll, the target feels as though a large hand or tentacle is crushing his or her heart, losing 1D3 hit points for each combat round that the spell is in effect. While under such attack, the target is temporarily paralyzed, as though having a heart attack. In the round that the accumulated damage from this spell reduces hit points to zero, the target’s chest ruptures and bursts, and the target’s smoking heart appears in the hand of the caster. 
Each round the spell lasts, the caster must spend magic points equal to twice the number of hit points in damage. The caster must concentrate on the spell each round that it is to remain in effect and the caster must defeat the target in an opposed POW roll each round. If the caster is distracted or if the target successfully resists, the spell ends. Any dam­age already done remains. 
Alternative names: The Vile Wrench, The Insidious Wrath of the Dark Wizard, Ye Loathsome Tickle. 
Consume Likeness 
Cost: 10 magic points every 6 hours of casting; 5 POW; 1D20 Sanity points 
Casting time: several days 
The caster can assume the living likeness of a person freshly dead, as seen by eye, video camera, X-ray, etc. The victim may be no more than 15 SIZ points different from the caster. For the next few days the caster consumes the victim and works the spell, expending 10 magic points every six hours and permanently sacrificing 5 POW points. The caster could consume several likenesses and thereby take on several guis­es. When a victim is consumed, the caster loses 1D20 Sanity points. This spell is known by many serpent people. 
Once the spell is complete, the caster takes on the ap­pearance of the victim at will, for as long as desired. To the keen observer, the shadow of the caster remains as his or her original (not that of the consumed). Similarly, the caster’s skills and memories remain intact—the victim’s are gone. 
Upon losing one or more hit points, the caster’s orig­inal form is resumed. To go from an assumed form to the original form takes 20 seconds. The original form must be reverted to before another form can be assumed. To go from the original to an assumed form takes 1D3 minutes. 
Alternative names: The Snake Skin Cloak, The Valusian Mantle, The Gift of Yig. 

Deeper version 

Casters are sometimes able to recollect memories and thoughts of those who have been consumed. This is usually a specific piece of information that was known to the unfortunate target of the spell. An additional magic point must be spent together with a roll under the caster’s POW for each additional piece of informa­

Contact Spells 
Cost: Refer to specific spell Sanity cost: 1D3 (plus more to view the monster) Casting time: 1D6 + 4 rounds 
Contact spells are divided in to two separate groups: spells concerned with contacting Mythos creatures and monsters and spells for contacting Mythos deities (see Contact Deity). 
Using Contact spells a cultist could get in touch with intelligent monsters and alien races, perhaps to learn more about history, magic, gods or alien species. The caster should have a definite goal in mind; bargains might be struck, agreements made, plans negotiated. 
Contact spells do not give the caster the upper hand though; the spell is merely a method of establishing contact. Remember these are independent and intelligent beings with their own (usually antithetical to human) motiva­tions—casters make contact at their peril! This is distinctly different to Summoning Spells (see page @@) that have the potential to allow casters to bind the summoned beings to their will. 
Procedures are much the same for each Contact spell, though particular conditions or requirements may be unique. Knowing one Contact spell is of no help in casting another. Many versions of Contact spells exist. 
Cast properly, this spell always works, unless there are no such things living within a convenient distance (flying polyps might journey from the City in the Sands to some part of Australia, but might ignore the chance to fly to North America). 
A Contact spell takes five to ten rounds to cast. The thing reached by the spell may appear in a game hour or take a game day or more to show up. For a random appearance in hours, roll 1D100. Entities living nearby will walk, swim, dig or fly to the spell point. If the trip is too long, the thing called by the spell never shows up. Things from other dimensions can appear in any characteristic or evocative manner. 
The spell brings a random member of the species, pre­sumably with its own motives. The caster should try to be alone or to be with no more than a small group, in order not to seem threatening. Once the contacted thing appears, it is free to depart, so if the caster has something to offer it, the chances for an extended meeting greatly improve. 
If a contacted species is large, such as a flying polyp, only one will likely appear. If it is human-sized or smaller, the Keeper may determine if several representatives arrive as a group. 
There is no guarantee that a contacted entity would rather bargain than devour the caster. It will have an alien motivation; however, if further contact seems of advantage to both sides, then some interesting roleplaying may emerge. 
As mentioned, each version of the spell requires certain conditions to be in place for it to work. Contact Chthonian: Unless there are no chthonians nearby, it succeeds automatically. The spell must be cast at a loca­tion that has known recent earthquakes or where hot spots and volcanoes offer relatively quick transport from the deep interior of the planet to the outer edge of the geologic crust. Cost: 5 magic points Contact Deep One: Unless there are no deep ones nearby, the chanting succeeds automatically. This spell should be cast at the edge of a saltwater ocean or sea. To work best, it should be cast near a deep one city, such as the waters off Innsmouth, Massachusetts or the coast near the lost town of Dunwich by the Sea, England. Part of the ritual consists of throwing specially inscribed stones into the water. 

Cost: 3 magic points Contact Elder Thing: Unless there are no elder things nearby, the chanting succeeds automatically. The most likely locations are along the southern part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge or over the geological trenches nearest Antarctica. Cost: 3 magic points Contact Flying Polyp: Unless there are no flying polyps nearby, it succeeds automatically. Flying polyps occur only in their rare underground cities, the largest of which is be­neath the City in the Sands, in the western Australian desert. The caster should first construct or open a communication shaft for their egress. Cost: 9 magic points Contact Formless Spawn: Unless there are no formless spawn nearby, it succeeds automatically. The best place to cast this spell is at a temple of Tsathoggua, whose altar statue of Tsathoggua is still present or at a spot near an opening into the black abyss of N’Kai, somewhere near Binger, Oklahoma. Possibly other places in Western or Midwestern North America offer entry and exit points. One such cavern reputedly exists near Dunwich, Massachusetts. Cost: 3 magic points Contact Ghoul: Unless there are no ghouls nearby, it succeeds automatically. Ghouls are found wherever large concentrations of humans are, especially near graveyards and crypts. Places of burial more than a century old are propitious locations for this spell. Moonlit nights are best. Cost: 5 magic points Contact Gnoph-Keh: Unless there are no gnoph-keh near­by, it succeeds automatically. Gnoph-keh are usually found in Greenland or other frozen wastes near the North Pole. 
The spell must be augmented with a successful Sing (Art & Craft specialism) roll and before doing so the caster must build a small effigy of the beast from ice and snow. Cost: 6 magic points Contact Hound of Tindalos: If a hound of Tindalos is sum­moned it will come automatically. There is no known way to bargain with a hound of Tindalos, whose motive for moving through the stream of time and space is pure hunger. Cost: 7 magic points Contact Mi-Go: Unless there are no mi-go nearby, it suc­ceeds automatically. The spell must be cast at the base or the top of a high mountain—in a range known to be mined or visited by the enigmatic space faring race. Among such ranges are the Appalachians, Andes and the Himalayas, and some peaks in Central Africa. Cost: 8 magic points Contact Rat-Thing: To bring forth a foul rat-thing, it must be cast at or near a site infested by rat-things. A popula­tion of these evil creatures reportedly exists in Yorkshire, England. Another report of similar creatures comes from Massachusetts. Cost: 2 magic points Contact Sand-Dweller: Unless there are no sand-dwellers nearby, it succeeds automatically. The spell must be cast in a suitable desert, such as in the Sahara, the southwestern United States, Saudi Arabia or central Australia. Cost: 3 magic points Contact Servitor of the Outer Gods: A successful Luck roll establishes that a servitor is within the Milky Way galaxy when the spell is cast. If no servitor is within that range, the magic points are lost. 
Stars must be visible to the caster. He or she attempts to visualize Azathoth’s Ineffable Heart (reputedly a spheroidal symbol of meditation but actually of unknown shape) that pulses and shines like liquid flame. The servitor manifests within 1D6+4 rounds and expects a blood sacrifice. If the nominated sacrifice is inadequate, the servitor devours the caster. If the servitor accepts the sacrifice, it agrees to per­form one simple task for the caster. 
With a successful Persuade roll, the servitor also deigns to answer one respectful question about Mighty Azathoth, the court at the center of the universe or an Outer God. The answer adds 1D3 Cthulhu Mythos to the questioner’s total, but the answer is meaningless to onlookers. 
With a roll of equal to or less than a fifth of the caster’s Persuade skill, the servitor also imparts a spell directly into the caster’s brain, costing the caster 1D8 Sanity points and 1D10 rounds of disorientation. The servitor chooses the spell. 
Its services rendered, the servitor may linger and play its unearthly pipes while colors flash across its body and its ten­tacles writhe, or it may dissolve and return to some galactic arm or stellar nursery and resume its previous activity. 
Hearing its insane and mesmerizing pipes costs 1/1D4 Sanity points and thereafter haunts every singer or instru­mentalist who was present. They become indifferent to earthly scales and more and more feel compelled to perform in the cosmic scales revealed to them. Cost: 14 magic points Contact Spirits of the Dead: Many versions of this spell ex­ist. One version requires a tent of white sheets to be erected near a river and jugs full of the stream’s water are placed in­side. Songs are sung and dances danced. An entreaty is made for the dead to appear. Add up all the magic points, multiply the sum by five, with the caster needing to roll equal to or under that result on 1D100. With a success, the voices of the dead emerge from the water jugs. One may hear them and discuss or question them by putting one’s head in the tent. Remember that the dead mostly know only what they knew in life and that some have not realized that they are dead. Cost: 3 or more magic points Contact Star-Spawn of Cthulhu: Unless there are no rep­resentatives nearby, it succeeds automatically. It should be cast at the ocean shore, perhaps near a deep one outpost or else near a spot where star-spawn may sleep. The spell works well in Polynesia, along the Massachusetts coast and above R’lyeh. Cost: 6 magic points Contact Yithian: This spell does not reach forward or back­ward in time. If a Yithian mind occupies a subject within one hundred miles of the caster at the time the spell is cast, the Yithian notices the appeal and may respond if curious, fearful or alarmed. If the caster has nothing interesting to say or offer, then the Great Race scholar ignores later questions or perhaps destroys the caster as a likely pest or nuisance. 
Cost: 4 magic points Alternative names: For Contact spells, use words like: Union, Commune, Exchange, Commerce, Covenant, Pact, Concord, etc. For example, The Red Pact, Covenant of the Deep, and so forth. 
Contact Deity Spells 
Cost: 5 POW; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: five to ten (1D6 + 4) rounds 
Contact Deity spells are unused except by the insane priests of these deities or by great independent sorcerers who hope to strike deals and win over some small fraction of the dei­ty’s powers. The deity sought for Contact can be any one of the Gods or Great Old Ones. 
For each such spell, the caster must sacrifice 5 POW. The chance of successfully contacting the deity is equal to half the caster’s (reduced) POW. If the roll succeeds, the deity or some aspect of it will contact the caster in a semi-friendly manner after a few game hours or days. The deity is unlikely to give non-worshipers anything of value. If the deity is bored or offended the god will likely squash the caster, or drive him or her insane, and so get some inhuman pleasure from the situation. 
Each version of the spell tends to reflect the deity con­cerned. Contact Deity: Chaugnar Faugn: Opens communication with Chaugnar Faugn. With a success, the deity sends the caster visions or nightmares that inform the dreamer of the god’s desires, or lets him or her know if a petition to the god is to be favorably answered or rejected. Contact Deity: Cthulhu: Opens communication with Cthulhu. Cthulhu typically responds at night, during the caster’s dreams. By dreams and nightmares he informs his followers of his desires. Contact Deity: Eihort: Resembles other Contact Deity spells, but the caster sacrifices 1 magic point instead of 5 POW in casting it. The god automatically appears in dream form if the caster is distant and in person if within a few hundred yards. In imparting this spell into the caster’s brain, Eihort extracts 5 POW in compensation. Contact Deity: Nodens: Opens communication with Nodens. The Contact spell for Nodens can be cast only from a remote, unpeopled place such as the edge of a sea-cliff. If, later, Nodens contacts the caster, it will be when he or she is alone and in a similar inaccessible place. Contact Deity: Nyarlathotep: Opens communication with Nyarlathotep. This spell can be cast from anywhere, as befits this omnipresent god; however, Nyarlathotep appears only at meetings of worshipers or when new priests of the Gods are anointed. Contact Deity: Tsathoggua: Opens communication with Tsathoggua. Tsathoggua may appear in spirit form as a hazy and translucent projection of his real self, to which normal Sanity losses apply. He usually visits only if the caster is alone. He speaks audibly to the caster. 
Contact Deity: Y’golonac: Opens communication with Y’golonac. This god responds by attempting to convert the caster to its worship. If the deity feels that the caster would be an unsuitable priest, it will psychically attack him or her and try to eat the soul and mind. If the caster might be suit­able, Y’golonac tries to possess a friend, who (controlled) approaches the caster to tempt him or her into service. 
Create Barrier of Naach-Tith 
Cost: variable magic points; 1D10 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 minute 
The barrier provides both a physical and magical defense. Each participant in this spell loses 1D10 Sanity points and a variable number of magic points. Each magic point ex­pended in the creation provides the barrier 3D10 points of STR. The spell takes 1 minute to cast (during which time all magic points to be used must be expended) and the result­ing barrier lasts 1D4+4 hours. Anyone who knows the spell may participate in the casting and contribute magic points to the barrier. 
The barrier is spherical in shape and about 100 yards in diameter. It can be cast around the casters to protect from harm or it can be cast to encompass a monster or enemy. Any creature bisected by the barrier’s boundary upon its creation is unharmed and thrust outside the barrier. Any­thing trapped should be allowed a STR roll opposed by the STR of the barrier. Multiple entrapped victims cannot com­bine their STR to escape. A bullet or missile can cross the barrier if the rolled damage (ignore impales) to the barrier is greater than a fifth of the barrier’s STR. If penetrating the barrier, the object does the damage rolled, as if the barrier did not exist, and the barrier is destroyed. 
A written copy of this spell is known to be in a great haunted library on a planet orbiting the star Celaeno, one of the Pleiades. 
Alternative names: Great Ward of Naach-Tith, The Un­seen Sphere that Entraps the Demon. 

Deeper version 
Those harnessing the knowledge and power of the Mythos are able to increase the size of the barrier to 200 yards in diameter. 


Create Mist of R’lyeh 
Cost: 2 magic points 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
The spell causes a dense mist to appear in an egg-shaped volume (10 x 10 x 15 feet), directly in front of the caster. The long axis of the cloud is always at right angles to the direction in which the caster faces. The spell obscures vision for 1D6+4 game rounds and then evaporates without trace. 
Alternative names: Ye Terrible Cloud, Breath of the Dark Sea, The Dank Fog of Sailors Lost. 
Create Zombie 
Cost: 16 magic points; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: a week 
A ritual liquid must be poured over a corpse or into the grave where a corpse lies. The Keeper determines the ingre­dients of the liquid—at least one part should be difficult to obtain legally. 
The corpse is left to mature. At the end of a week, the caster comes to the grave and intones the binding ritual. At the end of the half-hour chant, the corpse claws its way from the grave and thereafter performs the caster’s will. The zom­bie will perform mundane and simple tasks, such as “guard this”, “fetch that” or “kill him!” 
A zombie created in this manner continues to rot after it has risen. Thus, a wizard wishing a constant zombie servant must periodically create replacements. 
Statistics for zombies can be found in Chapter 16: Mon­sters, Beasts and Alien Gods. 
For a number of variations on this spell see Spell Varia­tions (see page @@). 
Alternative names: Ritual of the Undying, Black Binding, The Ashen Cowl, Raising of the Dead. 
Curse of the Putrid Husk 
Cost: 5 magic points; 10 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 hour 
This spell brings sanity wracking illusions to the victim. The victim perceives that his or her skin is visibly rotting and corrupting. The outward appearance seems to deteriorate swiftly, so that great rents and tears occur through which internal organs begin to tumble out (with the victim losing 1D10 Sanity points in the process). Thereupon the victim faints and awakens in a few minutes, whole and normal. 
For the spell to take effect an opposed INT roll must be made between the caster and target—impose one penalty die on the target if the spell is cast at night, whilst the target is sleeping. The entire cycle of effect takes about twenty minutes, including the faint. 
The target must be known to the caster and the caster must have as a focus some personal object belonging to the target. The experience of the spell is devastating; however, successful Psychoanalysis can help the victim come to terms with these inexplicable dreams and hallucinations and re­store half of each such Sanity loss. Psychiatric drugs do little to compensate for such an attack. 
Alternative names: The Insidious Nightmare, Summon Seven Devils to Afflick Thine Enemy, Wither the Mind of the Weak. 
Death Spell 
Cost: 24 magic points; 3D10 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1D3 rounds 
Reserved for only the most foul of sorcerers, this spell causes the bewildered victim to burst into flame. The target must be within ten yards of the caster. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target during each round of concentration. After 1D3 rounds of concentration, the victim’s skin forms large blisters and he or she loses 1D3 hit points. In the next round, the victim loses an additional 1D6 hit points. On the third round, the victim bursts into flames, losing 1D10 hit points then and each round thereafter. The stench of burning hair and flesh is overwhelming (all witnesses should make SAN rolls or lose 1/1D6 SAN). It is impossible to render aid, since the horrified victim burns from the inside out. 
Alternative names: Ye Dreadful Pricking, The Curse of Fiery Doom, Cthugha’s Embrace. 

Deeper version 

Rather than cause the victim to suffer the effects of this spell in near instantaneous fashion, the caster may elect to prolong the spell over a course of days to enhance the victim’s suffering. The caster spends 34 magic points in casting this version of the spell. The caster does not need to be physically near the victim—instead the caster must possess a piece of the victim (hair, nail clipping or skin, etc.), allowing the spell to be cast from any distance. The spell begins on the following day of casting and lasts for 7 days. For the spell to take effect, an opposed POW roll must be made between the caster and the target each day. On the first day, the victim suffers a 2 hit point wound, then a 4 hit point wound on the second day. There­after, the wound size increases by 2 hit points each day (6, 8, 10, 12, 14). An equal amount of Sanity is lost each day as the target begins to realize his or her terrible fate. On the day that hit points are reduced to zero, the victim’s body is consumed in a ball of flame. 

Dismiss Deity (see Call and Dismiss Deity Spells, page @@) 
Dominate 
Cost: 1 magic point; 1 Sanity point 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
Bends the will of the target to that of the caster. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. If successful, the target obeys the com­mands of the caster without exception until the next combat round concludes. 
The spell can affect only one individual at a time and has a maximum range of 10 yards. Obviously the command or commands must be intelligible to the target and the spell may be broken if a command contradicts the target’s basic nature (such as instructing a human to fly). 
Dominate can be cast and recast as many times as the caster finds possible, allowing a target to be controlled with­out interruption for several minutes. Each cast of the spell has the same costs and limits. Recasting is instantaneous. 
Alternative names: Command of the Wizard, The Chant of Possession, Baleful Influence. 
Dread Curse of Azathoth 
Cost: 4 magic points; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 round 
The sorcerer draws upon the energies of the Outer God to directly drain POW from a victim. By repeating the secret name of Azathoth, one can generate respect and fear in any being conversant with the Mythos, for to know the name implies that one knows the secret Last Syllable. Said alone, the Last Syllable may be directed against a foe. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. If the caster is successful, the target loses 3D6 POW. 
Alternative names: Utterance of the Last Syllable, Ye Doleful Leeching, By the True Name Thy Power is Sapped. 
Dust of Suleiman 
Casting time: 1 round to apply 1 dose 
Creates a grey-green powder that harms unnatural beings from other planes of existence. The powder requires the dust from an Egyptian mummy at least 2,000 years old; each such mummy suffices for three doses of the magic dust. The ingredients also include frankincense, sulphur, and saltpetre. An incantation must be said over the dust while it is being sprinkled. 
Sprinkled over a being not of this Earth, the entity loses 1D20 hit points per dose. It takes one round to apply a dose. The powder works only on extraterrestrial and other planar beings, thus the powder would harm a dimensional shambler, Yog-Sothoth or a mi-go, but is useless against a shoggoth or a deep one. 
Alternative names: The Egyptian Powder, Protection of the Dead. 
Elder Sign 
Cost: 10 POW 
Casting time: 1 hour 
Its decoration…was, rather, in the rough shape of a star, in the center of which there appeared to be a caricature of a single giant eye; but it was not an eye, rather a broken lozenge in shape with certain lines suggestive of flames or perhaps a soli­tary pillar of flame. 
—August Derleth and H.P. Lovecraft, The Lurker at the Threshold. 
The spell activates an Elder Sign. Each active Elder Sign takes a sacrifice of 10 POW to create, but costs no Sanity points. An Elder Sign may be formed into a leaden seal, carved in rock, forged in steel, etc. When made active beside an opening or Gate, it makes that path unusable to minions of the Great Old Ones and Mythos Gods, as well as to those greater beings themselves. Without the spell, the symbol itself means nothing and has no effect. 
The writings of certain scribes apart, the Elder Sign is worthless in personal defense if the monster or minion can evade the Sign. Those wearing an Elder Sign around the neck, for instance, might gain protection for a few square inches of flesh where the Sign rests against the skin; however, the rest of the wearer’s body would be completely vulnerable. 
Alternative names: The Elder Seal, The Omen Branch, The Five Points of Wisdom. 
Enthrall Victim 
Cost: 2 magic points; 1D6 Sanity points Casting time: 1 round The caster must be able to speak calmly with the target be­fore the spell can take effect. After a round or so of talking, an opposed POW roll must be made between the caster and target on 1D100. If overcome, the victim stands struck, numb and dumb, until relieved from the trance by physical assault or some similarly shocking event. If the caster fails to overcome the target, he or she may try the spell the follow­ing round. 
Alternative names: Strike Dumb, The Silver Beguiling Tongue. 
Evil Eye 
Cost: 10 magic points; 1D4 Sanity points Casting time: 1 round Casting this spell causes a victim to suffer from bad luck. Whilst the target must be within sight of the caster, the victim will not necessarily sense the Evil Eye spell’s influence, but is likely to feel an odd chill or unease when the Evil Eye is cast. 

With a successful casting, the victim’s chance for a Luck roll is halved*. The victim must apply one penalty die to all characteristic rolls and his or her guns jam on every roll of 75% or higher. The chances for Summon/Bind spells are halved. The effects continue until the next sunrise, until the caster removes the spell or until the caster is found and blooded (hit hard enough to bleed), or until the victim dies. 
*Neither can the victim spend or gain luck points if the Optional Luck Rule is being used. 
Alternative names: Ye Rite of Ill Fortune, Dark Curse, Witches’ Hex. 
Fist of Yog-Sothoth 
Cost: variable magic points; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
The caster causes a massive, invisible force to hit a single target. The caster must be able to see the target. 
Each magic point invested in the spell yields 2D10 STR of force. For every 30 feet of distance that the caster stands from the target (after the first thirty feet), the caster must spend an additional magic point. 
When the target is struck (if a living thing), an opposed roll must be made using the spell’s STR versus the target’s CON. If successful, the target is knocked unconscious. Whether or not the target is left unconscious, the target is always pushed away from the caster for a distance in feet equal to the STR of the blow minus the target’s SIZ. 
The spell can be used against the STR of inanimate objects such as doors or walls. Results may be obvious, but sometimes Keepers will have to determine these cases. 
For example: The caster spends 5 magic points to hit an investigator 50 feet away. 1 magic point is spent on the range. The other 4 generate a STR of 8D10 that are rolled for a result of 57. The investigator fails a Hard CON roll (since the spells STR is over 50) and so they are knocked unconscious. The investigator has a SIZ of 45 and is bowled back 12 feet by the impact. 
Alternative names: Channel the Strength of the Opener of the Way, Smite Down Thine Enemy, The Hideous Blast of the Foul One. 
Flesh Ward 
Cost: variable magic points; 1D4 Sanity points 
Casting time: 5 rounds 
Grants protection against physical attack. Each magic point spent gives the caster (or the chosen target) 1D6 points of armor against non-magical attacks. This protection wears off as it blocks damage. For example, if a character had 12 points of Flesh Ward as armor and was hit for 8 points of damage, the Flesh Ward would be reduced to 4 points, yet he or she would take no damage. The spell lasts 24 hours or until the protection is used up. 

Gate Spells 

The idea of a panel that would open on some remote world impressed Eibon as being rather fantastic, not to say farfetched. —Clark Ashton Smith, The Door to Saturn. 
Cost: variable POW see Table XIII: Gate Creation and Travel Costs Cost to access a Gate: variable magic points and 1 Sanity point Casting time: one hour per POW spent Gate spells allow the caster to create doorways between other lands or times, dimensions or worlds—allowing the user to travel great distances with a simple step. Usually a Gate connects to a single other location. 
Creation of a Gate requires the permanent expenditure of POW, in a sacrifice equal to the log to base 10 of the distance the Gate connects in miles times five. A Gate may take many forms, common ones being indicated by a pattern of painted lines on a floor or a peculiar arrangement of stones in a field. 
Using the Gate costs a number of magic points equal to one-fifth of the POW originally used to make the Gate. Each trip through a Gate costs 1 Sanity point. Should the user lack enough magic points for a trip, the traveller expends hit points to make up the cost. Return trips through a Gate always cost the same as the initial journey. 
Ordinarily, anyone or anything can move through a Gate, though some have been built so that a certain key—a word or gesture—is needed to activate the portal. Certain versions of the spell are known that also ‘change’ those who pass through, to aid survival on an alien world. There are also hints that some Gates are capable of more than one destination. 
Deeper version 

The caster may elect to prepare a Gate for travel by expending the necessary magic points before the journey. The Gate is thus primed and the next person stepping through the doorway is not required to pay the magic point cost, but will still need to sacrifice 1 Sanity point. 
Find Gate 

• 
Cost: 1 magic point; 1D3 Sanity points 

• 
Casting time: 20-60 minutes Through a series of gestures and a specific chant, the spell reveals to the caster any Gate if it is within the caster’s direct vision. 


Whilst this spell locates a Gate, it does not empower anyone to open, close, create or pass through it. Neither does this limited form of the spell allow the caster to determine whether the Gate traverses time or distance. 
Gate Boxes 

• 
Cost: 1 POW; variable magic points and Sanity points 

• 
Casting time: 5 hours Allows the creation of twin magical boxes that form two ends of a magical Gate. Going through a gate box costs exactly the same magic points and Sanity points as going through a normal Gate and the transit procedure is the same. 


First, two identical wooden boxes must be made to any desired SIZ. The boxes should be open only at one end. Then the necessary ritual, consisting of placing one’s hands on the boxes and conceiving certain hyper-dimensional lines and angles in one’s mind for about five hours must be performed. 5 POW is sacrificed at this time. Then the boxes automatically drain half the creator’s Magic points each day, until they have absorbed magic points equal to their total SIZ x 20. 1 Sanity point is lost for every full week of magic point drain. Once the necessary magic points have been taken, the boxes become operative. 
Time Gate 

• 
Cost: variable POW 

• 
Casting time: one hour per POW spent Creates a gate to the future or to the past. The spell resembles the Create Gate spell but costs POW for the number of years 



Deeper version 

The wizard is, through the use of diabolical symbols and chants, able to create multi-pathway Time Gates— thus one door may lead to more than one distant time or future. Only the caster knows which path leads to which time on entering the Gate. Those foolish enough to use the Gate unassisted by the caster will be unable to determine the correct path and could arrive at any of the times the Gate is keyed to (roll randomly). The process of creation remains the same. 

travelled rather than the number of miles journeyed. Use the Gate Creation and Travel Costs Table and substitute distance in years for distance in miles. 
The spell only yields a time approximate to that desired, though once such a Gate is created the exact interval between “now” and “then” remains the same. 
View Gate 
• 
Cost: variable magic and Sanity points 

• 
Casting time: 3 rounds When cast at a suspected Gate, this spell allows the caster and compan­ions to see what, if anything, is on the other side of the Gate without going through it. The cost varies with the number of magic points needed to activate the Gate. It always costs 1 magic point and 1 Sanity point to cast the spell. Viewing is a variable cost, one-tenth of the Gate cost (round up fractions). Thus a Gate costing 7 magic points to pass through requires 2 magic points and 2 Sanity points to view through. The view lasts 1D6+1 rounds. The spell may be cast as often as the caster’s magic points and Sanity points allow. 


If there is something horrific to see, additional Sanity charges should be required for each viewer. Viewers may attempt appropriate skill rolls to learn where or when or what is being viewing. Alternative names for Gate spells: Rite of Seeing, (Behold) Doorway to Other Places, Ye Portal of Many Journeys. Arch of Time, Gateway to Things Long Past and Sights Unseen, The Wizard’s Trap. 


Table XIII: Gate Creation and Travel Costs 
POW (Gate  Magic Points  Distance in miles/light years  
Creation)  (Gate Travel)  up to...  
5  1  100 Miles  
10  2  1,000 Miles  
15  3  10,000 Miles  
20  4  100,000 Miles  
25  5  1,000,000 Miles  
30  6  10,000,000 Miles  
35  7  100,000,000 Miles  
40  8  1,000,000,000 Miles  
45  9  10,000,000,000 Miles  
50  10  100,000,000,000 Miles  
55  11  1,000,000,000,000 Miles  
60  12  ~ 1/2 light year  
65  13  ~ 5 light years  
70  14  ~ 50 light years  
75  15  ~ 500 light years  
80  16  ~ 5,000 light years  
85  17  ~ 50,000 light years  
90  18  ~ 500,000 light years  
95  19  ~ 5,000,000 light years  
100  20  ~ 50,000,000 light years  




Table XIV: Gate Locations and Distances 
Distance from  Approx. furthest in  POW (magic points)  
Boston  miles/light years  needed  
Providence  40 miles  5 (1)  
Peoria  1,000 Miles  10 (2)  
Portland (Australia)  10,000 Miles  15 (3)  
Empty Space  100,000 Miles  20 (4)  
Moon  230,000 Miles  25 (5)  
Mercury  140,000,000 Miles  40 (8)  
Venus  160,000,000 Miles  40 (8)  
Mars  250,000,000 Miles  40 (8)  
Jupiter  600,000,000 Miles  40 (8)  
Saturn  1,000,000,000 Miles  40 (8)  
Uranus  1,900,000,000 Miles  45 (9)  
Neptune  2,800,000,000 Miles  45 (9)  
Yuggoth (Pluto)  4,600,000,000 Miles  45 (9)  
Oort Cloud  9,000,000,000 Miles  45 (9)  
Proxima Centauri  4.3 light years  65 (13)  
Sirius  8.3 light years  70 (14)  
Fomalhaut  ~ 22 light years  70 (14)  
Vega  ~ 26 light years  70 (14)  
Aldebaran  ~ 50 light years  70 (14)  
Celaeno  ~ 400 light years  75 (15)  
Far side of the Milky Way  ~ 70,000 light years  90 (18)  
Galaxy M31  ~ 2,800,000, light years  95 (19)  
Azathoth  ~ 10 billion light years  105 (23)  
Distant Quazar  ~ 15 billion light years  105 (23)  

1 astonomical 
~93,000,000 miles 35 (7)
unit 
~ 5,900,000,000,000
1 light year 60 (12)
miles 1 parsec 3.26 light years 65 (13) 
Once cast, the spell may not be re­inforced with further magic points, nor recast until the old spell’s protection has been used up. 
Alternative names: Protect Thee from Mighty Blows, Armour of the Will, Blood Shield. 
Green Decay 
Cost: 15 magic points; 10 POW; 2D8 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 day 
A curse that turns an individual into a green pile of mold. A day must be spent focusing energy upon the intended tar­get of the spell and reciting an incanta­tion to Glaaki. In the next 24 hours the caster must personally give a green leaf to the target. At dawn on the following day, for the spell to take effect an op­posed POW roll must be made between the caster and target on 1D100. If the target fails the green decay has begun. 
Over the next seven days the target effectively turns into a green mold. At first green blotches appear on the skin. These then begin to grow mold-like hairs. As the days progress, more and more of the victim’s skin grows green and the skin rots. In tandem, the vic­tim’s organs also rot. By the sixth day the victim’s mental facilities rapidly deteriorate and movement becomes impossible. The only known cure is to find and kill the caster, which reverses the spell’s effects. 
The only known written transcrip­tions of this hideous spell are within the Book of Eibon and the Revelations of Glaaki. 
Implant Fear 
Cost: 12 magic points; 1D6 Sanity points Casting time: Instantaneous This spell causes soul-chilling dread, breaking the target’s concentration and disrupting his or her actions. The caster must be able to see and point a finger at the target whilst invoking a curse. 
The sudden unnerving costs the target 0/1D6 Sanity points and they feel compelled to retreat to a ‘safe’ place— anywhere the person would normally feel safe and secure. 
Alternative names: Finger of Doom, Eibon’s Jinx, The Evil Eye. 
Melt Flesh 
Cost (dead flesh): 1 magic point per 15 SIZ of dead flesh; 1D4 Sanity points 
Cost (living flesh): 5 magic points per 15 SIZ of living flesh; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: 5 rounds 
This devilish spell heats flesh (dead or living) to its melting point in one round. If used on animate flesh, the cost is sub­stantially higher to the caster in magic points. The victim’s flesh is melted causing horrific disfigurement (1D4 damage per 15 SIZ points affected). In certain cases, such as where the face is targeted, the victim may become blind or lose the ability to hear and possibly suffocate unless air vents can be quickly created. Seeing human flesh melt off human bones costs 1/1D6 Sanity points. 
Alternative names: Rite of the Dissolution, Liquefy Skin. 
Mental Suggestion 
Cost: variable magic points and Sanity points 
Casting time: 3 rounds 
The caster can command any being with human blood in its veins. A single target, who is visible to the unaided eye of the sorcerer, is affected. The victim carries out all that is commanded by the caster, even to self-destruction. The spell also works against Lengites, deep one hybrids, ghoul changelings, Little People, serpent folk and deep ones who have interbred with humans, but doesn’t work on nonhu­man entities such as shantaks or dimensional shamblers. 
The caster intones the spell and relates the suggestion to the target. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. Extreme sugges­tions involving death or great harm require a second op­posed POW roll just before the suggestion is implemented. 
The cost for the spell varies with the suggestion. For ordinary unthreatening suggestions (drop your sword, hand over your money and leave, etc.), the cost is 5 magic points and 1D3 Sanity points. Riskier suggestions, but not ones an­tithetical to the target (go to Dunwich, set fire to a building, etc.), cost 10 magic points and 2D3 Sanity points. Danger­ous or suicidal suggestions (kill a companion, kidnap the President, etc.) cost 15 magic points and 3D3 Sanity points. 
If used on an investigator the effects lasts for 1 round for each point of INT the caster possesses. If the INT of the investigator is higher than that of the caster, the caster must win another POW roll every 10 rounds. When the caster fails the spell is broken. 
Alternative names: Domination of the Will, Master and Servant, Bend Quarry to Thy Power, Mesmerise, Bend Will, Shake Resolve, Govern Mind, Implant Suggestion. 

Mindblast 
Cost: 10 magic points; 1D3 Sanity points 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
The victim of this spell suffers a terrible mental assault, causing the loss of 5 Sanity points and inducing temporary insanity. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. 
The target is affected as per the rules for temporary insanity, beginning with a bout of madness, and may con­tinue to suffer from flashbacks and/or nightmares for days following. 
Alternative names: Curse of Enfeeblement, Wave of Doom, Abyss of the Mind’s Eye. 
Mind Exchange 
Cost: 10+1D6 magic points; 1D3 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 hour 
Allows the caster to trade minds with another individual. The caster loses 1D3 Sanity points and must expend magic points equal to one-fifth of the target’s POW the first time the spell is cast. Thereafter, the cost goes down 1 magic point per casting until it reaches 1, where it remains. The Sanity point cost does not decrease. 
The target must know the spell caster and love or strong­ly favor him or her. If that affection is somehow lost, the exchange can no longer occur. Fresh affection renews the chance. Upon arriving in another’s body, the target loses a minimum of 1/1D3 Sanity points. 
This spell can be cast at any range. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target, until the magic point cost for casting the spell has been reduced to 1, when an opposed POW roll is no longer required and the caster can transfer at will, using only a strong mental effort. 
The spell caster cannot initially stay more than a few minutes inside the target’s body, but progressively is able to longer and longer. Once the cost for transfer is 1 magic point, he or she can stay there indefinitely. 
Alternative names: Vice Versa Incantation, Rite of Ex­change, The Cloak of Another’s Flesh. 
Mind Transfer 
Cost: 10 magic points; 1D10 Sanity points 
Casting time: 5 rounds or more 
A powerful spell allowing the caster to permanently trade minds with a target, perhaps to attain longer life at the tar­get’s expense. 
For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. With success, the caster loses 1D10 Sanity points and the victim loses 1D20 Sanity points. If the exchange fails, the caster must immediately cast the spell again (losing 10 more magic points) or his or her soul dissipates into eternity. Once the transfer is begun, it cannot be broken off. 
A successful casting means that the caster has perma­nently taken control of the target’s body. The caster’s previ­ous body is now a hollow, dead thing. As for the mind of the target, conjecture suggests that it is expelled from the body and thus dies; however some hint that it remains inside its own body, subservient to the caster’s mind and locked in a permanent state of horrific madness. 

Deeper version 

The dark will of wizards is a mighty thing, often transcending the very grave. Wizards, fearful of death or eager to ensure longevity, may prepare the Mind Transfer spell many years in advance of its casting. Such preparations usually concern some personal item (such as portrait or dairy), wherein the spell is keyed, awaiting the right conditions for it to come to fruition. Oft times the key is some future relative of the caster who, unknowingly or willingly, activates the spell. 

Mirror of Tarkhun Atep 
Cost: 5 magic points; 1 Sanity point 
Casting time: half a day 
As a harassment or warning, the caster is able to project his or her image onto the surface of a mirror or mirroring sur­face that is being gazed into by the caster’s intended victim. 
The victim can be anywhere on Earth. The caster needs a mirror large enough to see his or her head and neck. Gazing within it and keeping an image of the target in mind, he or she utters the short incantation and waits. When the target looks into a darkened window, a mirror or any other reflective surface, an image of the caster begins to form. If the caster tires before the target looks into a mirror, that loss of attention breaks the spell. 
Sometimes the mirror image of the caster is looking directly into the eyes of the victim. At other times the caster is seen standing directly behind the victim in the reflection. If the victim wears glasses, images reflected from the lenses may even be resolved. The target can hear words and short phrases uttered by the caster. The caster can see through his or her mirror as well, and see the target and the target’s surroundings. 
Alternative names: The Silvery Warning, Reflection of Hate, The All Seeing Eye. 
Powder of Ibn-Ghazi 
Cost: 1 magic point per dose 
Casting time: 2 days preparation, 1 round to apply 
Those without the telescope saw only an instant’s flash of grey cloud—a cloud about the size of a moderately large building—near the top of the mountain. Curtis, who held the instrument, dropped it with a piercing shriek into the ankle-deep mud of the road. He reeled, and would have crumpled to the ground had not two or three others seized and steadied him. All he could do was moan half-inaudibly. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Dunwich Horror 
This spell makes visible magically invisible things by blow­ing the powder against or over the invisible thing. The pow­der must be compounded carefully, according to exacting instructions and involves three special ingredients and the sacrifice of 1 magic point per dose. A dose is one application of the powder. The Keeper determines the special ingredi­ents. 
The powder is either blown from a tube or thrown over the target. The thing that is dusted stays visible for no more than ten heartbeats. 
That which could be made visible includes the magical lines extending from a place enchanted for the Calling of a Mythos deity, the aura around a Gate, or a creature that is normally invisible, such as a star vampire. Using the powder costs no Sanity points, but seeing what it exposes may. 
Alternative names: Dust of Seeing, Witness of the Un­seen, Compound of Perception. 
Red Sign of Shudde M’ell 
Cost: 3 magic points; 1D8 Sanity points; 1 hit point per round 
Casting time: 1 round 
An awful spell that causes one or several victims to die horribly. The caster inscribes in the air the dreaded sign of Shudde M’ell, whilst speaking words of power. When formed correctly, a dull red symbol glows in the air as the caster’s finger describes it. The sign’s malevolent effects manifest the round after its creation. Once formed, the sign must be maintained by concentration and the expenditure of 3 more magic points each additional round. 
All those within 10 yards of the sign lose 1D3 hit points per round as their bodies quake and spasm, and their internal organs and blood vessels convulse. Those further than 10 yards but nearer than 30 yards lose 1 hit point each round. Those further than 30 yards take no damage. 
It is possible to escape the sign’s effect by crawling be­hind a stout wall or other opaque barrier. The caster must stand next to the sign and concentrate. The caster loses 1 hit point each round because of their proximity to the sign. 
Alternative names: The Red Sign, The Mark of Fiery Pain. 

Deeper version 
The caster may empower the red sign further by in­vesting 5 POW into its creation. This done, the sign causes 1D6 hit points loss per round to those within 10 yards and 2 hit points loss to those within 30 yards. 
Alternatively, the caster may elect to cause the sign to expel its dark energy in a single blast. The caster creates the sign as usual and invests it with 10 POW. On 1D4 rounds following, the sign will explode in blaze of red light causing 2D8 damage to everything 

Resurrection 
Cost: 3 magic points; 1D10 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 or 2 rounds 
He turned from the inscriptions to face the room with its bizarre contents, and saw that the kylix on the floor, in which the ominous efflorescent powder had lain, was giving forth a cloud of thick, greenish-black vapour of surprising volume and opacity. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Case of Charles Dexter Ward 
The spell reduces a corpse to its essential salts and com­pounds, a bluish-grey powder, or reverses the process to yield ultimately the form and soul of the deceased. A com­plete corpse is necessary. 
Being Resurrected in this manner costs the victim 1D20 Sanity points. 
If only part of the ashy powder is available for the spell, the sorcerer gets “onlie the liveliest awfullness” from what’s then made flesh. But the successfully resurrected need not be all in one piece—as long as the coffin is intact and suffi­cient care is taken to scrape together all the fragments and dust within, the spell succeeds. 
Reciting the spell backward returns the resurrected enti­ty to dust and likewise requires the expenditure of 3 magic points and 1D10 Sanity points. The dust can be retained or thrown away. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. If the caster wins, the victim returns to dust. If the victim wins, it may try to prevent the caster from reciting the spell again. Reciting the spell backward takes two rounds. In The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, many of those resurrected were interrogated and tortured to reveal secrets of the past. 
Alternative names: The Rite of Knowledge Long Lost, Recrudance, Rite of Salts. 

Shrivelling 
Cost: Variable magic points; Sanity points 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
A powerful offensive spell causing physical injury to a tar­get. The caster invests as many magic points as desired and that number halved in Sanity points. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. If successful, the target is subjected to a sudden and terrifying blast of energy, causing flesh to blacken and wither. The target loses 1 hit point per magic point invested in the spell. 
Alternative names: Shriving, The Withering Blast of Death, The Black Words. 

Deeper version 
Calling up the powerful energies of the Mythos is one thing; shaping them through understanding and com­prehension is another. Casters are able to inflict this spell without the need for a POW roll. In addition, the caster may elect to induce further mental terror for the victim; whilst reeling from the energy blast, the target believes that he or she is being assaulted by horrific Mythos entities, causing 1/1D6 Sanity loss. 


Song of Hastur 
Cost: 1D4 magic points per round; 1D4 Sanity points per round 
Casting time: 3 rounds before it begins to take effect 
A hideous wailing ululation by the caster causes the skin and flesh of the chosen victim to bubble and fester into pestilent blobs. 
The target must be visible to the caster. Though everyone can hear the song, the spell affects only the person chosen as target. This spell will not work except at night and only if the star Aldebaran is visible. A roll equal to or under the caster’s POW must be made to sing the correct alien melody. 
Successfully cast, the spell causes the target 1D6 hit points damage per round the spell is active. After every two rounds, scarring reduces the victim’s APP by 3D10. After every four rounds, internal ruptures lower the victim’s CON by 3D10. When the victim’s CON reaches 0 or death occurs from hit point loss, the body swells up, and then bursts with a sickening pop as steamy gore spills onto the floor. 
The song can be used defensively, to guard against another caster of this spell. Successful opposing castings neutralize each other. 
Alternative names: The King’s Cry, Music of the Court in Yellow, Bring Forth the Festering Boil of Great Agony and Torment. 

Deeper version 

The clarity of understanding and tuning to the mysteries of Hastur allow the caster to comprehend the secrets of Hali and the necessary alignments of Aldebaran in space and time. Thus the spell may be cast when Aldebaran is not visible in the night sky. 
In addition, the caster may weave an echo of the song into a piece of yellow cloth taken from the court of the King in Yellow. Investing 20 magic points into the pale material means that the next person to touch the cloth suffers the effects of the spell for 10 rounds—the victim may attempt to roll equal to or below half their 

Summoning Spells 
Cost: variable magic points; 1D4 Sanity points 
Casting time: 5 minutes per magic point spent, binding takes 1 round. 
Such spells concern themselves with alien races and atten­dants, those monsters that commonly serve greater monsters or wizards. The general procedures for these spells are the same, but conditions may vary from spell to spell. Knowing one such spell is of no use whatsoever in attempting to cast another. Unless the Keeper wishes otherwise, the summon and the bind portions of each spell are learned together. Foolish is the impatient wizard who only learns to summon and not to bind… 
With the exception of Summon/Bind Servitor of the Outer Gods, these spells require the sacrifice of 1 magic point per 10 percentiles chance for success. For example, 3 magic points gives a 30% chance for the spell to succeed. In general, for each magic point spent, the caster must spend five minutes chanting—the greater the chance for success, the longer the spell takes to cast. A result of 96-100 is always a failure—a rolled result of 100 should always have bad consequences for the wizard concerned. 
The caster also loses 1D4 Sanity points per spell cast, whether the spell succeeds or not. 
If a success, one being appears per spell, 2D10 game minutes after the chant concludes. The thing appearing may also require a Sanity loss to see it. 
As the Keeper wishes, the thing arrives bound or the Keeper may ask that the caster make an opposed POW roll versus the summoned being. With a success, the thing is bound; with a failure, it attacks the caster and then returns from whence it came. Bound, the thing must obey one order by the caster, even to attacking its own kind, after which it is freed and returns from whence it came. 
Form of the Command 
The caster’s command to the thing must be specific and lim­ited in duration: “protect me from harm forever,” would not be a valid command; however, “slay that man in the corner,” would be. The thing is bound to the caster until it fulfills a command (a bound thing without a command soon finds a way to leave). Orders might include carrying someone some­where, presiding at some ceremony, being especially docile while being examined by a group of professors, appearing somewhere as a warning to those assembled—whatever can be imagined. 
Keep commands simple. The best rule of thumb is that a command has no more words than one-fifth of the thing’s INT. Simple gestures such as pointing will be under­stood. Assume that the thing is always able to understand a straightforward command, whether spoken in English or Urdu. See also Separate Binding, below. Summon Byakhee: a whistle must be blown during the chant. This spell is active only on nights when Aldebaran is above the horizon (October through March are the best months). The summoned byakhee will flap down out of the sky, still icy from its travels through space. 
If the whistle is enchanted, each point of POW in its enchantment adds 2 percentiles to the chance for success. Such a whistle may be used again and again. 
Alternative names: Call in to Service Thy Steed, The Melody that brings the Journeyed. Summon Dark Young: brings present a single dark young. A beast of at least SIZ 40 must be sacrificed. The summoner needs a knife to make certain ritual cuts in dispatching the victim. Cast this spell outdoors, in a wood, during the dark of the moon. A dark young will stalk out of the shadows after the summoning. 
Alternative names: Envoke the Darke of the Forest, Knife Ritual of the Bleeding Bark. Summon Dimensional Shambler: a single dimensional shambler gradually assembles itself out of thin air. The spell requires a dagger made from any pure metal such as copper or iron. Alloys such as brass will not work. If the dagger is enchanted, the chance for success also rises by 2 percentiles per point of POW in the dagger. This spell may be cast day or night. One authority has written that shamblers are more easily confused in bright sunlight. 
Alternative names: Recitation to Bring the Wanderer, The Song of Copper. Summon Fire Vampire: causes one fire vampire to swoop down from the sky like a skittering star. A bonfire or other source of flame is required. The spell may be cast only at night when the star Fomalhaut is above the horizon (Sep­tember through November are the best times in moderately northern latitudes). 
Alternative names: Conjure the Glittering Ones, The Autumnal Call of Living Fire. Summon Hunting Horror: A single horror appears head­first, as though entering through a hole in the air. This spell may be cast only at night in the open air. If no alternate sacrifice has been prepared for the binding (see below), it takes the caster and vanishes 
Alternative names: Petition the Feasting Teeth, Utteranc­es That Bring Forth the Twisting Devils. Summon Nightgaunt: A nearly silent swoosh of air comes, and then the single ghastly form of the blank-faced flying horror appears. To summon, a stone emblazoned with the cryptic Elder Sign must be present, but the stone itself need not be star-shaped. The spell can be cast only at night when there is no moon. 
Alternative names: The Whispered Words of the Faceless Men, Conjure the Winged Shadow. Summon Servitor Of The Outer Gods: A single servitor arrives amid haunting echoes of insane piping. The magic point cost is triple that of the standard summoning spell; for each three magic points sacrificed, increase the chance for a successful cast by 10 percentiles; a result of 96-100 is always a failure. Each cast of this spell also costs 3D4 Sanity points. A flute is also needed to cast this spell; if the flute is enchanted, it increases the chance for the spell’s success by 2 percentiles per point of POW within the flute. Cultists cast this spell anywhere and at any time that is especially unhallowed—typical nights would be Midsummer’s Eve, Samhain and Walpurgis Night. 
Alternative names: The Ritual Symphony of the Inde­scribable Ones, Recitation of the Maddening Piping. Summon Star Vampire: curious rustling sounds are heard once this invisible thing lurks near. The caster also needs a book in which are written or inscribed the words of the spell. If the book is enchanted, the chance for success is in­creased by 2 percentiles per point of POW within the book. This spell can be cast only at night under a cloudless sky. The creature is invisible save when its veins fill with blood from some visible creature. 
Alternative names: The Night Call of the Feasting Death, Chant of the Bloody Letters. 
Separate Binding 
Cost: 1 Sanity point 
Casting time: 1 round 
Binding and Summoning are two sides of the same coin. Sometimes they are learned as one spell, sometimes not. At the Keeper’s discretion the effects may be combined or two separate rolls might be asked for, one to summon and a second to bind. 
If a monster arrives unbound or is come upon unexpectedly, it may be bound on the spot. The caster must know the Sum­mon/Bind spell for that type of thing and must spend a round chanting before the thing can be bound. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. Each cast of the binding costs 1 Sanity point but no magic points. A binding works on only one creature at a time. One option open to the caster is to invest a number of magic points equal to one-fifth of the summoned creature’s POW to gain a bonus die on the opposed POW roll to bind the monster. 

An attacking creature cannot be bound by the person it is fighting; however, it could be bound by a person able to hold back from the fray. A creature presently bound cannot be re-bound until its present command is completed. A creature to be bound must be visible to the caster and within 100 yards. Binding requires an opposed roll and opposed rolls cannot be pushed; if the opposed roll is failed, the caster is in trouble! Bind Byakhee: If an enchanted whistle is used, the caster gains a bonus die on the opposed POW roll. Such a whistle may be used again and again. 
Alternative names: Obligation of the Steed, Compel the Journeyed. Bind Dark Young: If the caster uses an enchanted knife to kill their victim with certain ritual cuts they gain a bonus die to the opposed POW roll. 
Alternative names: Entrance the Heart Wood, Com­mand the Forest for Thy Bidding. Bind Dimensional Shambler: If the caster possesses an en­chanted dagger made from any pure metal such as copper or iron they gain one bonus to the opposed POW roll A second bonus die may be gained if the Dimensional Shambler is exposed to bright sunlight. 
Alternative names: The Copper Binding, Entrapment of the Searing Light. Bind Fire Vampire: If the caster stands within a bonfire they gain one bonus die to the opposed POW roll. How the flames are resisted is up to the caster. 
Alternative names: Annexation of the Fiery Devil, Au­thority of the Blazing Tongue. Bind Hunting Horror: The blood sacrifice of a sentient be­ing is needed. The caster does not perform the sacrifice—the hunting horror seizes the sacrifice. The caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll to bind the Horror. 
Alternative names: Tie The Twisting Fear to Thy Will, Deed of Murder. Bind Nightgaunt: If the caster has a stone emblazoned with the cryptic Elder Sign they gain one bonus on the opposed POW roll. 
Alternative names: Mastery of the Faceless Ones, The Elder Token by which They will Know You. Bind Servitor Of The Outer Gods: If the caster possesses an enchanted flute they gain one bonus die to bind the Servitor. 
Alternative names: The Secret Note of Command, Pact of Wittering Madness. Bind Star Vampire: If the caster possesses an enchanted book containing the spell they gain one bonus die on the opposed POW roll. 
Alternative names: Vow of the Bloody Accord, The Un­godly Promise. 
Voorish Sign 
Cost: 1 magic point; 1 Sanity point 
Casting time: 1 round 
They from outside will help, but they cannot take body without human blood. That upstairs looks it will have the right cast. I can see it a little when I make the Voorish sign. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Dunwich Horror 
An ancient and powerful hand gesture used by wizards that benefits the casting of other spells. It may lessen the cost, reduce the casting time or increase the effect a little, depend­ing on the spell in question. 
Voorish Sign is also rumored to temporarily ward against Mythos monsters—such creatures are wary of the sign and may hold off an attack until the wizard’s intentions are known. 
Alternative names: Sign of Power, Cunninge Pass. 
Warding 
Cost: 1 magic point per stone 
Casting time: 5 rounds 
A number of ordinary white stones are placed on the ground as the caster pleases, except that each must be within a yard of each of the others. When cast, a shimmering heat haze can be seen over the stones. Thereafter if any stone is moved, the caster will be aware of the fact, even if asleep until then. Once this has occurred, the spell is broken. 
Alternative names: Stones of Safekeeping, Leave Thy Burden to the Rock, Circle of Protection. 
Wave of Oblivion 
Cost: 30 magic points; 1D8 Sanity points 
Casting time: 1 hour 
A mighty spell that causes a powerful ocean wave to smash down at the caster’s direction. The caster must be able to see the intended target and sufficient quantities of salt water must be present to create the wave. The caster stands in the water to cast the spell. 
The wave volume is 3,000 cubic feet, enough to swamp or capsize a small sloop. Needless to say, people swallowed up by such waves vanish forever below the surface. 
Others can contribute magic points to the spell to create vast waves capable of sinking ocean liners, battleships or Manhattan Island. Those knowing the spell can contribute as many magic points as desired and must expend 1D8 San­ity points. Those who do not know the spell can contribute 1 magic point each. At a minimum of 30 magic points, the wave is ten feet long, ten feet wide and thirty feet high. Each additional magic point adds a foot to the length and width of the wave. 
Alternative names: Song of the Ocean’s Fist, The Salt Gift, Ye Watery Doom. 
Wither Limb 
Cost: 8 magic points; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: Instantaneous 
A terrifying spell designed to torment and cause permanent damage to a target. The caster must be within 10 yards of the target. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. If successful, the caster nominates an arm or leg. The said appendage rapidly and painfully withers and shrivels, causing 1D8 hit points of damage and a permanent loss of 2D10 CON. The victim and any witnesses lose 0/1D3 Sanity points each. 
Alternative names: The Song of Pain, Shrivel Thy Enemy, The Wasting Burn. 
Words of Power 
Cost: 3+ magic points; 1D6 Sanity points 
Casting time: 10+ minutes 
The caster creates an intense bond with a large group of listeners. The caster must speak extemporaneously and seemingly from the heart, maintaining the audience’s atten­tion. For each ten minutes of speech, the caster must expend 3 magic points and make a successful communication roll as the Keeper thinks appropriate (Charm or Persuade), or the speech ends indecisively and in confusion. At the end of a successful speech, the audience thoroughly believes what has been said for 1D3 days. 
Alternative names: Sekhmenkenhep’s Words, Beguile the Unrighteous, Mastery of the Mob. 
Wrack 
Cost: 3 magic points; 1 Sanity point 
Casting time: 1 round 
This spell will temporarily incapacitate a single target who is within 10 yards of the caster. For the spell to take effect the caster must succeed in an opposed POW roll with the target. Intense, wracking pains seize the target, the face and hands blister and drip fluid, and the eyes cloud with blood and become temporarily sightless. The target is rendered completely helpless during the period of the spell’s effect. 
The effect lasts 1D6 rounds, after which sight returns. In 3D10 minutes, the target fully recovers and can resume nor­mal activity. Traces of physical corruption fade quickly and in 24 hours only faint blemishes can be seen on the skin. Each such experience costs the target 1/1D6+1 Sanity points. 
Alternative names: Woeful Agony of the Wretched, The Festering Blindness of the Seven Hells, Rend Enemy. 


They had found unholy ways to keep their brains alive, either in the same body or different bodies; and had evidently achieved a way of tapping the consciousness of the dead whom they gathered together. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Case Of Charles Dexter Ward 


lthough most investigators tend to see creatures of the Mythos as little more than malignant monsters, in truth many of them have vibrant and technologically advanced 

societies. Advanced races such as the elder things, mi-go, serpent people, and Yithians all possess the ability to construct and utilize technology in the pursuit of their agendas. 
Mythos races, human cultists, and wizards may occa­sionally have access to ancient and otherworldly artifacts as well as to scientific marvels. A selection of technology and arcane artifacts follows. 
Most humans would be unable to tell the difference between a piece of advanced scientific equipment and a magical Mythos artifact, as both are essentially beyond mankind’s level of comprehension and ability to reproduce. Indeed, what mankind may consider to be high magic could well be technological in nature, and vice versa. 
Mi-Go 

Not only are the mi-go technologicallyadvanced (several hundred years beyond thatof Earth), but they also are eager to use it;technology is very much part of their dailylife. The mi-go originally came to Earth tosteal certain minerals they could not find ontheir own worlds. Thus, most technology thatthe mi-go have brought to Earth relates tomining or to war. 
The mi-go also touch upon the edges ofthe dark technology of the Mythos Gods,perhaps more so than any other Mythos race.They created Ghadamon, a larval Great OldOne, from a Seed of Azathoth; they formedthe Shining Trapezohedron, which has apeculiar power over an aspect of Nyarlthotep;and they constructed a network of magicalgates which tie together many of their outposts.
The longevity of their stay on Earth toperform experiments on and study Earth’s lifeforms would suggest the possibility of morearcane technology existing in hidden mi-gooutposts. Mi-go advanced knowledge ofmedical and surgical techniques must benoted. They are able to remove a human brainfrom its body and preserve it for thousandsof years, totally functional. In addition theycan create authentic-looking biologicalautomatons and engage in many surgicaltechniques that humans would considermiraculous. 
Wherever such technology resides, themi-go guard it jealously and will pursue anyone foolish enough to steal it away. 
Bio-Web Armor 
Bio-Web Armor 
Used by: Mi-go 
In dangerous situations, mi-go typically don these webs of semi-luminous green slime. The harnesses provides 8 points of armor against blows, flame, electricity, etc. 
Humans may wear these bio-webs, but take 1 point of damage as hair and flesh is ripped away each time the armor is removed. A bio-web will slowly degrade because humans do not exude the proper nutrient solutions to care for it. 
Each time it is worn by a human, a bio-web decreases in protection by one point. When no armor points remain, the armor disintegrates into a steaming, sticky pool of viscous matter. Whether there are significant side effects to wearing this armor is unknown. 
Black Lotus Powder 
Used by: Serpent people 
A mind-bending psychedelic, also known as “black sty­gian,” used by serpent people as a means of torture to ex­tract information. In minute quantities the lotus powder is a mild hallucinogen, equivalent to magic mushrooms; however in larger doses the drug may reduce those taking it to insane, driveling idiots. 
The drug can be administered either by injection (the powder when heated turns to liquid) or by inhalation (the black smoke given-off smells like burnt toffee). If more than the usual (recreational) dose is administered, the victim immediately begins to hallucinate for 1D6 minutes per dose. The visions are totally immersive and horrifying, granting insights into the unspeakable knowledge of the Mythos— some serpent men claim that it is like looking into the very face of Azathoth. 1D4 Sanity points are lost per minute the drug is active. During this period, the victim is highly sus­ceptible to questioning, readily revealing information and close-kept secrets. Towards the end, the victim’s body goes into spasm until collapsing into unconsciousness for 1D10 hours. It is not uncommon for the victim to wake up totally insane. 
Accounts suggest that the black lotus flower was rare even in the time of famed Valusia and today it is thought the infamous plant is long extinct. However, from time to time, ancient vials and jars have been uncovered containing quantities of black stygian powder. It is unknown, yet pre­sumable, that modern science might be able to analyze the powder’s compounds and recreate them. 
Brain Cylinder 
Used by: Mi-go 
These shiny cylinders are used to preserve extracted brains. Lovecraft described them as, “a foot high and somewhat less in diameter, with three curious sockets set in an isosceles triangle over the front convex surface.” 
Each cylinder is filled with a nutrient solution that sustains the brain within. Three accessory machines—a tall rig with twin lenses mounted on front, a box with vacuum tubes and a sounding board, and a small box with a metal disc on top comprise the mi-go sensing apparatus. These machines, when connected to the proper sockets, provide the brain with the faculties of sight, speech, and hearing. The mi-go, not possessed of human senses, have done their best; however it is but an approximation of sound and vision. All visual input is grainy, of low general resolution and the audio is flat, like that of a monaural phonograph. Speech, with all its nuances of inflection and emotion, is utterly lost on the fungi. The speech machine talks with a mechanical, monotone voice, devoid of emotion. When the sensory machines are disconnected or deactivated, the encased brain falls into a semi-insane sleep state filled with strange dreams and hallucinations. 


Every month a human brain is enclosed within a cylinder, the brain must roll under or equal to its INT. If successful, the brain remembers it is stuck inside a tin can and loses 1D3 Sanity points. 
Carotid Toxin 
Used by: Serpent people 
A rare poison that causes a slow degeneration of the carotid arteries. The toxin slowly eats away at the carotid arteries, causing massive internal bleeding and almost instantaneous death. 
The effect of the poison takes a number of days equal to one-fifth of the victim’s CON. After this period an Extreme CON roll must be made, otherwise the imbiber suffers an agonizing death over the course of 1D3 days. If the CON roll is successful, the imbiber becomes extremely sick for 1D6 days as the poison is fought off, with most needing to be confined to bed. No doctor will find evidence of disease. During this period, STR and CON temporarily drop to 10— the victim is utterly exhausted and suffers from terrifying hallucinations. Thereafter, the victim regains 1D10 points of STR and CON per day until fully recovered. 
Crystal of the Elder Things 
Used by: Elder things 
Large crystalline storage containers constructed to harness the power needed to bind shoggoths to elder thing will. These crystals store magic points. The smallest shards might store 5 magic points and the largest 100. A caster can draw some or all of the magic points from a crystal while casting a spell. 
When empty these crystals are room temperature, but they become colder as more magic points are stored in them. 
To access the magic points stored the user must become attuned to the spe­cific crystal. There must be physical contact and the user must spend 1D6 rounds attuning to the vibrations of the crystal. On the final round a POW roll must be made. With success the user can draw upon the magic points within as needed. Note that only elder things have the ability and understand­ing to invest crystals with further magic points. 

Brain Cylinder 

Crystallizer of Dream 
Used by: Anyone 
Looking like a large, yellowish egg, the crystallizer is used to view places faraway (distant lands, planets and perhaps dimensions) in dreams. 
A second, purported, function of this artifact is the abili­ty it bestows upon its user to bring items (or even creatures) back with them from the Dreamlands. Presumably the user must have the item or creature in physical contact with them for this to be successful. 
Myths surround this unique device and tell that the user should beware lest they fall foul of the guardian of the crys­tallizer—a servant of Hypnos that appears like a translucent jellyfish. 
Domination Serum 
Used by: Serpent people 
A colorless serum with the faintest taste of raspberries. No more than ten drops are required for full effect. If a Hard Con roll is failed the target becomes very suggestible, but only to serpent people. Something in their peculiar smell or the specific intonation of their voices is the key to this sug­gestibility. The victim will do almost anything for serpent people, short of endangering his or her own life or the lives of loved ones. 
The serum metabolizes slowly, taking 1D10+10 days for a victim to be free of its effects, provided no more is imbibed in the meantime. 
Earthquake Mining Machine 
Used by: Mi-go 
A massive cube measuring twenty feet on a side. The sides are covered with small, irregularly spaced convex windows of a cloudy, glasslike substance. When the device is made active it can be adjusted to pull a deeply buried stratum up through intervening layers of rock. The machine can reach down four to five miles and can affect an area up to one cubic mile in area at a time. However, the machine has the unfortunate side effect of causing earthquakes when it is used. 
The size and depth of the area affected are directly cor­related to the magnitude of the earthquake. For this reason mi-go tend to use such machines only in largely uninhabited areas, to avoid detection. A human unfamiliar with mi-go technology would be unlikely to be able to use the earth­quake mining machine, except perhaps accidentally. 
Electric Gun 
Used by: Mi-go 
This weapon looks like a warty, doorknob-sized lump of black metal, covered in tiny wires. Mi-go fire this weapon by clutching it tightly and changing the electrical resistance of the lump. 
When activated, the weapon fires a bluish bolt of sparks, causing 1D10 points of damage to the target. When it hits, the electric jolt acts like a taser, causing violent muscle spasms that immobilize the victim for a number of rounds equal to the damage inflicted. The target must make a CON roll or fall unconscious for 1D6 rounds—if the roll is fumbled the target suffers cardiac arrest and dies, unless immediate medical intervention is received. 
Mi-go take normal rolled damage (surface burns to the carapace) from these weapons, but do not have electrical nervous systems and are immune to the other possible ef­fects of damage from the electrical charges. 
To be able to fire this alien weapon humans must realign the wires on the electric gun, a feat requiring a Hard Electrical Repair roll. So jury-rigged for human use, the weapon fires uncertainly. Roll 1D6 when attempting to fire: the weapon fires only on a result of 1–2. The base chance for a human attacking with the Firearms (Electric Gun) skill is 10%. 

Electric Gun 
Glass from Leng
 …a great round window of a most curious clouded glass, of which [Wilbur] said only that it was a work of great antiqui­ty, which he had discovered and acquired in the course of his travels in Asia. He referred to it at one time as “the glass from Leng” and at another as “possibly Hyadean in origin”, neither of which enlightened me in the slightest. 
—August Derleth and H.P. Lovecraft, The Gable Window. 
Used by: Anyone 
This magical arcane glass allows the possessor to see random visions of other places. The owner inscribes a pentagram in red chalk (presumably for protection), recites a brief verse and then the glass shows a scene of beings from the Cthulhu Mythos. Unfortunately, such beings can also see through the glass to the user’s side. The choice of scene viewed is not of the user’s choice and appears randomly. 
The spell used to enchant the glass is long forgotten, although rumors persist that a certain odd fellow who lives in Carcosa will impart the spell if a bargain can be reached. 
The Moon Lens 
Within Goatswood, in the Severn Valley of England, resides an artifactknown as the moon lens. Built byworshippers of Shub-Niggurath, the lensacts to concentrate a beam of moonlightand so aid in the summoning of the DarkMother with a Thousand Young at thefull moon (instead of the dark of themoon as normally required). 
Researchers of the occult suggestthat the moon lens is actually a glassfrom Leng specifically tuned to thevibrations and space whereinShub-Niggurath dwells. If so, then itwould effectively provide the god with adirect semi-permanent portal or gateway to the Earth. 
Great White Space, The 
Used by: Elder things 
A strange other dimension. It is unknown if the elder things actually created this dimension, however there is no doubt that they actively exploited it. It connects places light years apart and is or was used by the elder things to traverse the universe. The elder things created at least one portal to the Great White Space on Earth, deep in the mountains of China; whether more portals exist remains to be discovered. 

If the Great White Space was a dimension constructed by the elder things, it is reasonable to presume that other pocket dimensions may have also been created. Probably varying in size and secretly existing until discovered by some hapless traveller or sorcerer, who knows what such spaces would hold? 
Lamp of Alhazred 
The lamp of Alhazred was unusual in its appearance. It was meant for burning oil, and seemed to be of gold. It had the shape of a small oblong pot, with a handle curved up from one side, and a spout for wick and flame on the other. Many curious drawings decorated it, together with letters and pictures arranged into words in a language unfamiliar. 
—August Derleth and H.P. Lovecraft, The Lamp of Alhazred. Used by: Anyone 
An enchanted oil-burning lamp. When lit, the lamp gives forth vapors that send the minds of those who inhale them into ecstasies of vision. These revelations are of the strange and weird landscapes of Mythos places and dimensions, and the ways of the entities there. If this lamp were actually used by Al-Hazred, the author of the Al Azif, some of the breadth of his knowledge would be explained. 
It is believed that the lamp is unique, however its where­abouts today is unknown. 
Lightning Gun 
Used by: Yithians 
A rare Yithian weapon, this device was created by the race shortly after their arrival on prehistoric Earth. Built to combat the carnivorous flying polyps, it is a camera-shaped weapon that fires great gouts of electricity. 
Numerous varieties exist. A common one contains a pack of 32 charges and takes 1 round to reload. Multiple charges may be fired at once, though each charge used above four at one time gives a 5% cumulative chance of burning out the gun. Each charge does 1D10 damage to the target of the weapon. 
Lightning Gun 

Base range is 100 yards. For each additional 100 
yards add one penalty to the attack roll and decrease the damage roll result by 3. At point-blank range add one bonus to the attack roll. 
An investigator can figure out how to use this weapon with a successful INT roll. The base chance for a human attacking with the Firearms (Lightning Gun) skill is 10%. 
Mist Projector 
Used by: Mi-go 
A device looking like a cluster of twisted metal tubes that projects a cone of icy mist in a fat cloud about ten feet 

Mist Projector 
Flying polyps 
The malicious flying polypscolonized Earth aeons ago,apparently after flying to Earthon their own power. The flyingpolyps built great basaltcities—the very ones they werelater sealed in—but there is no other evidence of their technology. It is assumed that itis at least at the level of humanity’s during the late MiddleAges. 
across. The mist looks like thick white fog and is intensely cold. The mist does 1D10 points of damage per round of exposure, less one point if the targets are dressed in warm clothing or three points for thick, arctic clothing. Hiding inside a car affords four points of protection, however the mist freezes automobile engines, running or not, and the car will not start or restart until it warms up. The weapon’s pro­jection can be sustained—mi-go generally spray mist over a target for several rounds, ensuring the death of unprotected humans. 
An investigator can figure out how to use this weapon with a successful INT roll. Because the mist travels much more slowly than a bullet, investigators who have seen mist projectors in action and who have freedom of movement 
(i.e.they are not caught in an enclosed space), can dodge the slow-moving mist streams with a successful DEX roll. 
The weapons carry enough charge for twenty shots, each potentially lasting an entire combat round. 
Plutonian Drug 
I have here five pellets of the drug Liao. It was used by the Chinese philosopher Lao Tze, and while under its influence he visioned Tao. Tao is the most mysterious force in the world; it surrounds and pervades all things 
—Frank Belknap Long, The Hounds of Tindalos. Used by: Anyone 
This drug can send the user’s mind back in time, sometimes so far back that the user may even encounter the hounds of Tindalos (see page @@)—entities capable of traveling up and down time via its ‘corners’. 
Those taking the drug must make a Sanity roll or lose 1D8 sanity points; however if they come across Mythos entities on their journey back in time they are subject to the standard sanity losses for viewing those entities. Taking the plutonian drug and witnessing the true history of the universe and planet Earth provides the user with 1D6 Cthulhu Mythos points. 
The drug can appear in liquid or tablet form and its manufacture is hinted at within certain Mythos tomes, including the Book of Eibon (see page @@). 
Insects from Shaggai 
The technology of the shan seemsmost like that of the mi-go—it has beenpredominantly turned toward the darkscience of the Mythos Gods. They flythrough space in great pyramidal spaceships; at the center of each of thesecraft is a ‘nuclear reactor’—which is thought to be a portion or dimensionalportal to Azathoth. Weaponry is aparticular area of shan advancement.Their cruel nervewhip is just one of themany weapons they have designed. 

Shining Trapezohedron 
[it was] a nearly black, red-striated polyhedron with many irregular flat surfaces; either a very remarkable crystal of some sort, or an artificial object of carved and highly polished mineral matter. It did not touch the bottom of the box, but was held suspended by means of a metal band around its center, with seven queerly-designed supports extending horizontally to angles of the box’s inner wall near the top… exposed, [Blake] could scarcely tear his eyes from it, and as he looked at its glistening surfaces he almost fancied it was 
transparent, with half-formed worlds of wonder within. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Haunter of the Dark. 

Used by: Cultists of Nyarlathotep 
A peculiar metal box in which is mounted a stone about four inches thick. It rewards or damns those who look into it with visions of other worlds and dimensions—thus the stone shines with the interior light of things not of our world. 
When the box is closed (enclosing the gem in total dark­ness), a hideous avatar of Nyarlathotep comes, known as the Haunter of the Dark since it abhors light—it will not enter any space where light is present, not even the pale circles of light cast by street lamps. 
The stone exercises great command over human psyches and is believed to be used by worshippers of Nyarlathotep. This artifact is ancient, predating humanity and possibly manufactured by the mi-go on Yuggoth. 
Serpent People 

Many serpent people kingdoms were founded onsorcery and alchemy; however, there is at leastone—which originated deep below the Earth inYoth and then migrated to Hyperborea—whichraised science to new levels. It is believed that these serpent people were at least as advanced asthe humans of the late twentieth century, but inthe science of biology they far excelled. 
The serpent people of Yoth were able tomanipulate life forms as they desired. It isbelieved that both ghasts and the voormis aretheir creations, each bred to carry out certaintasks for their ophidian masters. Not only couldthe serpent people adjust the genetic structureof a creature in its prenatal state, so it changedas it grew, but they also developed serums whichcould evoke the most remarkable transformations in fully grown specimens. Cloning and acceleratedgrowth were also well within the serpentpeople’s ability.
Another particular area of serpent peopleinterest was the creation of various poisons andtoxins. Some killed, while others simply inducedsleep. Some acted quickly, while others mighttake a century to take full effect. Some wereblatantly obvious—causing fear—while others wereincredibly subtle. No other race has come closeto approaching the level of knowledge of poisonsenjoyed by the serpent people.
The later Hyperborean civilization of theserpent people, which preserved many of thesecrets of Yoth, fell almost a million years agoand since then the technology of the serpentpeople has almost utterly disappeared. Somemodern serpent people strive to regain their losttechnology, but they are few. 

Star Stones of Mnar 
Used by: Anyone 
Usually found in the same location as the supposed tombs of ancient ‘evil’ beings. Best described as green-colored disk-shaped (sometimes star-shaped) rocks on which is carved an Elder Sign (see page @@). 
The stones are alleged to come from the fabled land of Mnar in prehistory, although some occult scholars suggest that this is a mere tale and that the stones are extraterrestrial in origin and were perhaps fashioned by the Elder Gods themselves. Either way, a star stone is believed to ward the bearer against the minions the Great Old Ones, granting safe passage in dark places. Note that the protection only extends to the minions of Great Old Ones, not the Great Old Ones themselves! 
Wise folk state that the stones are blighted and that anyone removing a star stone from its proper place will suffer an elder curse. Presumably the Elder Gods do not wish the stones to be removed from the prison-tombs of the Great Old Ones, as doing so might weaken the magicks in force and allow the imprisoned god to break free. 
Stasis Cube 
Used by: Yithians 
These devices appear in a number of different shapes and sizes, however they all have a single purpose: to slow the flow of time. Older cubes give ratios of 1-sec­ond internal time per thousand years external time, but in the future the Yithians will advance this to 1-second internal time per million years external time. 
The smallest stasis cubes were used to store books in Pnakotus. Larger stasis cubes have been used to fling Yithians into the future. Almost all stasis cubes are simple in design, made from metal or plastic with no sign of external circuitry. 
Pushing a button or opening up the stasis cube 
deactivates most stasis cubes, but some have complicated panels allowing the programming of set periods of stasis. 
These more complicated devices would likely be incom­prehensible to someone who did not understand Yithian technology, but anyone could use the simpler ones, perhaps even by accident. 
Tabula Rasa Device 
Used by: Yithians 
A device invented by the Yithians to erase the memories of those entities they displace through time. It is a small, slim, rectangular copper box covered with tiny indentations. From one side of the box, five flexible metal tubes extend, ending in inch-long metal needles. The needles are inserted into the victim’s head, which takes five rounds. Once the device is activated, the victim is paralyzed unless he or she makes a successful POW roll each round that the device is connected. 
Each round the machine erases up to a year’s worth of memories or removes 5 points of INT, at the operator’s discretion. These memories and thoughts are stored in the copper box. The erasure of memories is not always totally complete. Every year there is an INT chance that some memory returns in the form of dreams. The function of this device may also be reversed, feeding the stored memories to the original victim or alternatively to another entity entirely. 
1D100 INT. 
brain damage and the loss of 
to the machine has suffered 
that the person connected 
vice—failure would indicate 
to successful operate the de­
require an Extreme INT roll 
of Yithian technology would 
technology. Humans ignorant 
by those familiar with Yithian 


can only be used 
Deep ones 
The technology of the deep ones isalmost unrecognizable to humans.Beyond basic Stone Age constructs,most of the technology of the deepones is organic in form. It is believedthat they discovered the basis of theirorganic technology when they first alliedwith the shoggoths and discovered howthe elder things had made thosecreatures and how they could becontrolled. In the modern world, deepone cities are not as much constructed as grown. On occasion other usefultools are grown as well. Technologydoes not influence deep one societynearly as much as it does humanity’s, but it is still an important force. 

Temporal Communicator 
Used by: Yithians 
These devices are sometimes supplied to human agents of the Yithians. When assembled, the device stands nearly a foot tall. It is made of bronze and covered with intricate carvings. A red jewel, attuned to a specific Yithian, is embed­ded into the top of the machine. 
When power is switched on, the jewel begins to glow red. After a few minutes, contact is established with the Yithian attuned to the jewel. The Yithian may be any distance in time or space. A hologram is projected and the Yithian can see into the time and space occupied by the machine and thus may communicate with those who have contacted it. 
A Yithian temporal communicator is fairly straightfor­ward to operate, provided that an investigator can under­stand and determine which carving turns it on. 

It is absolutely necessary, for the peace and safety of mankind, that some of earth’s dark, dead corners and unplumbed depths be let alone; lest sleeping abnormalities wake to resurgent life, and blasphemously surviving nightmares squirm and splash out of their black lairs to newer and wider conquests. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, At the Mountains of Madness 


his chapter provides a selection of monsters, beasts and alien beings for use within Call of Cthulhu. The chapter is divided in to four sec­tions, each focusing on a specific monster type: Cthulhu Mythos entities, Cthulhu Mythos 

gods, classic monsters and beasts. The selection of monsters across the sections is not exhaustive—every horror fan can probably think of some terror not present. The ones here are those found in the most important stories, frequently appear in scenarios, or are commonly referred to. Many more can be found in the Call of Cthulhu supplement Malleus Monstrorum, also from Chaosium. 
About the Entries 
Most monsters and entities have characteristics including STR, CON, SIZ, POW, INT, and DEX. However many do not have an APP or EDU, since these qualities are meaningless in such alien and horrific creatures. Keepers have full reign to alter, modify, and rethink these entries. Lovecraft did not codify the monsters in his stories, so neither should you if you wish to present dramatically different versions. 
These are creatures of nightmare, and individual mon­sters may vary from one encounter to the next in their char­acteristics and abilities. The characteristic values given for each monster are those of an average specimen. As Keeper, you have the option to roll an individual monster’s statistics, or choose to create a lesser or greater specimen using the dice ranges as a guide to generating characteristic values. 
Only full characteristic values are listed for monsters. 
Non-player character and monster characteristics are pri­marily used to set the difficulty level of players’ skill rolls. As Keeper, you may occasionally need to figure out one-half or one-fifth of a particular monster’s characteristic value, but this will be unusual. 
Monster Sizes 
Certain monsters are staggeringly huge when compared to the human scale (mostly 15-90%); for example, a dhole’s average SIZ of 2775 equates to being nearly 31 times the size of the largest human. For size comparisons, see the illustrations on page @@. 

Builds 
Along with the characteristic of SIZ, each monster, character and vehicle has a build value. This figure provides an ‘at a glance’ guide to scale. The average hu­man has a build of 0, with the full range extending from –2 (children and small persons) to +2 (heavyweight boxers for example). The Build Scale is not linear; combining 5 motorcycles would not create something larger than a truck. 
When considering what a being can lift or throw, use a standard human as a guide. The average human of Build 0 could lift someone of equal build off the floor, perhaps carrying them over their shoulder. Something of 1 build smaller could easily be lifted, and a thing of 2 builds smaller could be thrown. With a strain, a human of Build 0 might just lift a person of Build 1. The most a person of Build 0 might do to a person of Build 2 is to unbalance them or disarm them. 


Table XV: Comparative Builds 
Build  Natural World  Mythos  Inanimate  
-2  Child, fruit bat  Fire vampire  
-1  Large dog  
0  Average human  Servant of Gla'aki  
adult, wolf  
1  Deep one  Light motorcycle  
2  Large human, Lion  Byakhee  
3  Black bear, gorilla  Formless spawn  Heavy motorcycle  
4  Cape buffalo, horse  Elder things  Economy car  
5  Dark Young  Standard car  
6  Adult Chthonian  Pickup truck  
7  African elephant  Dagon  6 ton truck  
9  Shoggoth  18-wheeler truck  
11  Star-spawn of  
Cthulhu  
22  Blue Whale  Great Cthulhu  
65  Dhole  Battleship  



Using this as a guide, it becomes simple to figure the relative capability of a monster to lift and throw things—for example, whether a monster is large enough to throw a car. 
i If a target is 2 builds smaller: it can be thrown. 
i If a target is 1 build smaller: it can be lifted with ease. 
i If a target is of equal build: it can be carried for a short time. 
i If a target is 1 build larger: it can barely be lifted. 
i If a target is 2 builds larger: it cannot be lifted, but might be unbalanced or disarmed. 
Playing Monsters Effectively 
Monsters are, for the most part, not mindless animals. Many are of equal or greater intelligence than the investigators, with motivations and concerns beyond the scope of the av­erage human’s understanding. Monsters will not automat­ically seek combat and, if they do, they will not necessarily seek to kill the investigators. The more intelligent monsters may take the investigators captive, either to use as slaves or sacrifices, or perhaps for experimental purposes. Not every encounter has to be a fight; hiding or fleeing may be the wisest option. 
When involved in combat, consider the monster’s objec­tive. If its aim is to kill the investigator it should fight back rather than dodge. If it wants to escape from the investigators, it may choose to dodge in order to gain an opportunity to flee. 
Many Mythos monsters can use spells, casting them as any other spell caster would. In some cases a monster’s spell may be portrayed as a manifestation of that monster’s innate power. 
Monsters may not have skills listed, though most or all might have a few skills such as Listen, Stealth, or Spot Hidden. Keepers should add skills as required, using com­parative beings as a guide. 
Mythos gods and some Mythos monsters are multidi­mensional, existing in our plane of reality as well as others beyond our reasoning, and thus cannot be truly slain. While hit points are given, should such a creature as an Outer God or Great Old One be somehow reduced to 0 or negative hit points, the thing is not killed or rendered unconscious, but dispelled or forced back whence it came. Mere damage will not destroy or even harm these powers. If they are forced or persuaded to leave, they can return. 
Monsters and Investigators— a Comparison 
It is quite possible for the investigators to beat some monsters in combat; against others, however, their only chance of surviv­al is generally to flee or hide. Deep ones, byakhees, dimensional shamblers, fire vampires, ghasts, ghouls, servants of Gla'aki, mi-go, moon-beasts, nightgaunts, rat-things, sand-dwellers, serpent people, insects from Shagghai, tcho-tcho, and of course human cultists can all be ‘taken on’ in combat by sev­eral investigators with some hope of success. This is the reason that so many scenarios feature cultists, deep ones, mi-go, and ghouls—they make approximately human-scale adversaries. Such Mythos entities can, on first reflection, appear human-like in terms of their vulnerability and relative size; yet beware of humanizing such monsters. As stated, their goals, knowledge, and abilities should be difficult, if not impossible, to fathom. They will act in unexpected ways and the mere sight of them can draw madness down upon the inquisitive investigator. 

Combat 
By default, every monster (with a few exceptions), has the Fighting skill—a generic combat skill covering all manner of strikes, kicks, claws, teeth, tentacles, elbows, head butts, etc. If the being is able to use melee weapons, the Fighting skill should be used for those as well. Be creative in how you use and portray these attacks. Each entry describes how the monster would normally attack and key words, such as ‘bite’ or ‘kick’, are provided to give Keepers ideas on how best to describe differing attacks. The environment can also be added in to the description of attacks and damage: an investigator could be crushed between an elephant and a tree; a ghoul could crack open an investigator’s head against a gravestone; and so on. 
While a monster’s standard attack could be used every time, this could become repetitive and dull. Using the damage listed for the monster’s standard Fighting attack frees the Keeper from having to adjust the damage with each variation, allowing the Keeper greater freedom to describe the monster’s attacks in creative and imaginative ways. The Keeper is neither gaining an advantage or disadvantage in varying the monster’s attacks— he or she is making the story more exciting and engaging. 

Monsters and Maneuvers 
Maneuvers (mnvr) use the monster’s Fighting skill. Build is an important factor for mnvrs; if the opponent is 3 Build points above that of an attacker, a maneuver is ineffective. Any monster of Build 2 or greater is never going to have penalty dice when using a maneuver against a human being. The largest opponent a human (maximum Build 2) could take on with a maneuver would be Build 4 (horse, elder thing, etc.)—even then, the largest of humans would attack with 2 penalty dice due to the difference in Build. 
In combat, monsters can use the same range of maneu­vers open to humans. The Keeper should visualize the mon­ster and imagine how it might take advantage of its physical 


held until they succeed in an opposed STR roll or maneuver of their own to free themselves. With a successful maneuver, a monster could: i Knock an investigator to the floor, gaining a bonus die on its next attack if the investigator is still prone. 
i Push an investigator out of a window or over a cliff. 
i Disarm an investigator, knocking that annoying ‘boom-stick’ out of his or her hands. 
i Grasp hold of an investigator with a tentacle, gain­ing a bonus die to cause harm by constriction or pummeling the held investigator against a wall on the next attack. 
i If the monster is large enough, it could seize an investigator and carry him or her off next round, perhaps flying away or carrying the held investiga­tor aloft with a writhing tentacle. 
i A standard car has a Build of 5, so any monster with a Build of 3+ has the potential to damage vehicles. Larger monsters might even seize hold of a vehicle containing the investigators, much like an angry child throwing a cereal box. 
Monsters and Fighting Back 
Unless a being is trying to escape or to be especially crafty, you should respond to investigator attacks by fighting back rather than dodging. When fighting back, a monster should generally use its basic Fighting skill. A monster that has more than one attack per round may also dodge or fight back that number of times before its enemies are granted a bonus die for outnumbering it (see Outnumbered, page @@). Thus a ghoul with three attacks can fight back three times before its attackers gain a bonus die to their attacks. Some Mythos entities can never be outnumbered by investigators. 
Killing Monsters 
Rather than declaring that a monster or opponent is dead, the Keeper is encouraged to describe what the investigators can see—the monster has stopped moving, it appears to be melting, a thick green fluid is welling up from a hole in the side of its body, and so on. Remember that these monsters are strange and alien beings; determining death should not be simple. Some monsters (when reduced to unconscious­ness or zero hit points) may appear to be dead, only to rise again moments or hours later to inflict a grisly revenge on their attackers. Only a successful First Aid or Medicine roll will determine for sure whether a being is alive or dead. 
Monster Spells 
The higher a monster’s POW and INT, the more likely it is to know spells. As a guide, those with POW and INT of 50 to 100 might know 1D6 spells. In choosing spells, consider the purpose and the nature of the creature. Keepers are encouraged to manipulate and alter spells to better suit par­ticular Mythos monsters. No casting roll is required for the initial casting of a spell by a monster. Expend magic points as required by the spell cost, but disregard any SAN costs or Sanity rolls. Suitable spells for each monster are suggested, although others may be known if the Keeper wishes. 
In choosing spells, consider the purpose and the nature of the creature. In many cases, the Mythos monsters described here worship one or more of the Outer Gods or Great Old Ones, and it should be assumed that they would know at least one spell to contact, call or summon their masters. 
Chapter 13: Grimoire details many suitable spells, however Keepers are encouraged to manipulate and alter spells to better suit particular Mythos monsters, after all, these beings are not some fumbling human wizard seeking the mysteries of magic, but rather the very embodiment of the Mythos in all of its horrific splendor. Keepers are rec­ommended to use the deeper versions of spells for Mythos monsters. 
Section One: Mythos Monsters 
This section details the abominations of the Cthulhu Mythos—creatures of this world and from beyond. The monsters described here are, in the main, repugnant to humanity in their visage and aspect, being a threat to both an investigator’s mind and body. 
Keepers are reminded that these embodiments of the Mythos are not uniform in their appearance and distinc­tions can be made between creatures of the same race. 
When portraying a Mythos monster, the Keeper should avoid only illustrating the visual aspect to the players. Smell and sound are important signifiers; so too is the otherworld­ly atmosphere such creatures create. As the Necronomicon states, “…as a foulness shall ye shall know Them.” 
Byakhee 
There flapped rhythmically a horde of tame, trained, hybrid winged things…not altogether crows, nor moles, nor buzzards, nor ants, nor decomposed human beings, but something I cannot and must not recall. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Festival 

This interstellar race often serves Hastur the Unnamable and may be summoned to partake in rituals. Composed of conventional matter, they are vulnerable to ordinary weap­ons such as pistols. 
Dwelling in interstellar space, byakhee do not have bases on Earth, but may be summoned to perform deeds or to serve as steeds, carrying riders through interstellar space. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Fly: Byakhee can fly through space and carry a rider; though such riders need protection from the vacuum and cold by suitable spells or potions (e.g. Space Mead). 
Spells: Byakhee have a 40% chance of knowing 1D4 spells. Such spells may relate to Hastur and associated beings. 
BYAKHEE, The star-steeds 
char. averages rolls 
STR 90 (5D6 x5) CON 50 (3D6 x5) SIZ 90 (5D6 x5) INT 50 (3D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) 
Byakhee 
Bite and hold (mnvr): 
byakhee may strike with claws or crash in to its victim delivering grievous wounds. 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: The 
DEX 67 (3D6+3 x5) Hit Points: 14 Average Damage Bonus:
Average Build: 2 Average Magic Points: Move: 5/16 flying 
If the bite strikes home the byakhee remains attached to the victim and begins to drain his or her blood. Each round the byakhee remains attached, including the first, the blood drain subtracts 3D10 points of STR from the victim, until death occurs (at STR 0). The byakhee char­acteristically remains attached with this attack until the victim is drained of blood unless the victim can make a successful opposed STR roll. Escaping death, let the victim rest and regain blood (by transfusion as well), at up to 1D10+5 STR per day. A Byakhee may hold only one victim at a time. 
Fighting 55% (27/11), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Bite and hold (mnvr) damage 1D6 + 3D10 STR (blood) drain (single victim) Dodge 33% (16/6) 
Armor: 2 points of fur and tough hide. Skills: Listen 50%, Spot Hidden 50%. Sanity Loss: 1/1D6 Sanity points to see a byakhee. 


Chthonians 
Flowing tentacles and pulpy gray-black, elongated sack of 
a body… no distinguishing features at all other than the 

reaching, groping tentacles. Or was there—yes—a lump in 
the upper body of the thing… a container of sorts for the 
brain, ganglia, or whichever diseased organ governed this 
horror’s loathsome life! 
—Brian Lumley, The Burrowers Beneath 

These creatures are like immense earth-bound squids, and their elongated wormlike bodies are coated with slime. A chanting sound accompanies them. These powerful burrow­ers live more than a thousand years, and are protective of their young. A jumble of remarkable properties, chthonians bear little resemblance to anything else on this planet. The most important individual chthonian is the gigantic Shudde M’ell. 
All stages of chthonians communicate by telepathy and can thus reach another of their race anywhere in the world, and can sense other minds. Only adults can telepathically control members of other species with this power. 
They can tunnel through rock as though it were butter and have no need to breathe. Adult chthonians can with­stand enormous temperatures, up to 4000°C (7200°F). It may be that the majority of chthonians live toward the core of this planet, and that only outcasts, wanderers, and those accidentally caught up in pluming magma explore the cold outer crust where man thrives. Perhaps they migrate here to give birth, since the younger stages cannot withstand extreme heat. We do not know their motives. 
Full adults can cause powerful earthquakes. 

Chthonians are extremely susceptible to water. While their slime coating protects them from small amounts of water, general immersion destroys a chthonian. Burrowing, these monsters avoid significant water by distinguishing the relatively low echo profiles of water and watery sediment, avoiding such areas. 
Chthonians are worldwide, even found in basalt under the oceans. In western Africa is a mystery city called G’harne, which they frequent. They may have been imprisoned there once, aeons ago. 
The general discussion and initial statistics concern the full adult, the last and largest stage (instar) between molts. This is the sort which investigators are most likely to meet. A closing section compares all six stages, since a nest of young­er chthonians may be encountered, or a band of chthonians with varying age groups could be met with. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Chthonian telepathic control: Chthonians can use te­lepathy to control humans, though they do not often do so unless the target has something they want, such as odd spherical mineral formations. 
The target may attempt to resist a single chthonian with an opposed POW roll. Overcome, the victim is bound to the area where psychically attacked. At first the target has mobility of a mile or so, but this progressively lessens as the chthonian draws nearer, until the victim may not be able to leave a particular room, or even a particular chair. The target immobilized, the chthonian erupts through the floor and collects its due. If the victim becomes aware of the mental influence of a chthonian, the hold may be broken by successfully making a POW roll versus the chthonian. Once a victim has experience of chthonians, a successful INT roll constitutes awareness. 
A chthonian can telepathically contact a known human anywhere on the Earth, but it may take time before it can locate its victim’s mind. 
It costs a chthonian one magic point to communicate with a human or to bind a human to a site for a day. Each ten miles of distance from a binding also costs another magic point. Several chthonians may contribute magic points to compensate for distance, but the POW rolls are made indi­vidually. 
It costs no magic points to contact another chthonian, no matter at what distance. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that adults may be able to drain a human’s magic points, but nothing definite is truly known. 
Earthquake attacks: All adult chthonians can create earth­quakes. Figure an earthquake’s force by totaling the POW of participating chthonians and dividing by 100. The result is the earthquake’s magnitude on the Richter Scale, but only in the first diameter of 100 yards. In the next 100 yards, the Richter force is lessened by one, and so on for each additional 100 yards until the strength of the quake can be ignored. Alternatively, the chthonians might limit the force in the center diameter and instead extend the quake’s diam­eter-of-effect or maximum effect by multiples of 100 yards. 
At least half of the participants must be directly under the center of the earthquake. Each chthonian must spend magic points equal to the highest Richter Scale number generated for the quake. Historically, the highest Richter numbers have been approximately nines, but geological evidence exists of quakes that have been much stronger. 
Spells: A full adult has a 50% chance of knowing 1D6 spells, most of which should be connected with Shudde M’ell and Great Old Ones tied to this earth, such as Cthulhu, Y’Golonac, Yig, etc. 
Chthonian 

CHTHONIAN FULL ADULTS, Tentacled burrowers 
char. averages rolls 
STR 260 (3D6 x25) CON 200 (3D6+30 x5) SIZ 260 (3D6 x25) INT 90 (3D6 x5) POW 90 (3D6 x5) DEX 35 (2D6 x5) HP: 46 Average Damage Bonus: +5D6 Average Build: 6 Average Magic Points: 18 Move: 6/1 burrowing 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1D8. It may only use its crush attack once per round. Fighting attacks: It’s dangerous to get near to these things. Their crushing bulk and flailing tentacles may strike at any moment. 
Hold and Drain (mnvr): Each round, a chthonian can attack with 1D8 tentacles, each of which cause damage equal to half the creature’s damage bonus (round down). If a tentacle strikes home, it clings and worms its way into the victim’s vitals, and begins to drain off blood and fluids, costing 3D10 CON each round. Reaching 0 CON, the victim dies. CON lost to a chtho­nian is gone for good. While a tentacle is draining a victim, it cannot be used to drain other targets, but it could still be used to fight-back, swinging the poor held victim like a ball on a chain at its attacker. Tentacles draining their targets will continue to sap CON each round. Each tentacle could attack a different target or they could all attack the same one. 
Crush: A chthonian may use its immense bulk to crush a foe. If crushing, it can continue to hold and drain victims that are already caught. The chthonian rears up and crashes down on a group: the crush area is circular, striking equally all within. The crush area equals a diameter in yards of the chthonian’s SIZ divided by fifty. Within the crush area, an investigator must succeed with DEX, Dodge or Jump, or lose hit points equal to the creature’s full damage bonus. 
Fighting 75% (37/15), damage 2D6 (thrashing tentacles) Hold & Drain (mnvr) damage 2D6 + blood drain (seizing tentacles) Crush 80% (40/16), damage: damage bonus (bulk, group) Dodge 17% (8/3) 
Armor: 5-point hide and muscle; regenerates 5 hit points per round after wounded, but ceases to work when below 1 hit point. 
Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D20 Sanity points for a full adult; 1/1D10 Sanity points for the lesser instars; no Sanity points to see a hatchling. 

Colours Out of Space 
The shaft of phosphorescence from the well brought a sense of 
doom and abnormality which far outraced any image their 
conscious minds could form. It was no longer shining out, it 
was pouring out; and as the shapeless stream of unplaceable 
colour left the well it seemed to flow directly into the sky. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Colour Out of Space 
A colour is a sentient organism that manifests itself as pure colour—it is not gaseous, it is insubstantial. When it moves, it is visible as an amorphous, glistening patch of colour, rolling and shining in shades of its pale colours that match nothing in the known spectrum. This patch pours over the ground or flies in a living fashion. When it feeds, its victim’s skin and face glow with the color. 
Though incorporeal, its passing nonetheless feels like the touch of a slimy, unhealthy vapor. Geiger counters register its presence as a distinctive burst of radiation. With today’s light-intensification gear, it shows as a bright patch of luminosity. Infrared viewers are useless. 
Colours come from the depths of space, where natural laws differ. Adult colours create embryos, harmless three­inch spheres seemingly empty. Deposited on verdant soil or in shallow waters, the embryo begins to germinate. After a few days, the outer shell dissolves and the new creature, which we may term a larva, emerges. 
The jellylike larva can grow to great size. As it infiltrates the ecosystem, local vegetation exhibits a tremendous but unhealthy growth. Fruit tastes bitter. Insects and animals are born deformed. At night, all plant life glows with the colour, and the vegetation begins to twist and writhe at night, as though in a strong wind. Even humans shine with the spec­tral light. After a few months, the larva transforms into a young colour. 
It now makes brief trips from its lair to feed, and begins to drain the life force from the area previously affected by the larva. When it drains enough energy, it departs the planet for space and adulthood. In so maturing, the colour may drain life force from an area of five acres or so if rich in life, or perhaps 10-20 acres of moor or grassland. The area drained is ruined thereafter, and no plant can grow. 
Bright light inhibits a colour. It spends daylight hours in dark, cool hideaways, preferably underwater: cisterns, wells, lakes, reservoirs, and oceans are all suitable. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Disintegrate: A colour can focus its energies to disintegrate a hole through almost any material. This ability is used primarily to excavate a lair underground. The same effort to melt a cubic foot of titanium removes several cubic yards of pinewood. The sides of the hole appear melted, but no heat is generated. 
Solidify: A Colour can concentrate and solidify a part of itself. That part becomes translucent. It can then manipulate objects. 


Colour out of Space 

COLOURS OUT OF SPACE, Life-force feeders 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  15  (1D6 x 5) per 50 POW or fraction thereof  
CON  N/A  
SIZ  equal to POW  
INT  70  (4D6 x5)  
POW  50*  (2D6 x5)  
DEX  95  (2D6+12 x5)  

*Base amount, which then increases as a color feeds. HP: N/A Average Damage Bonus: N/A Average Build: 0 Average Magic Points: 10* Move: 12 pouring/20 flying 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 1 
Since a colour is so efficient an attacker, Keepers may wish to allow investigators to see it coming, allowing Spot Hidden rolls to detect its slight glow or to notice a sudden presence of ozone. Colours lack any recognized Fighting skill and cannot be harmed by normal means. 
Characteristic Drain: When the colour is feeding, the victim must make an opposed POW roll. If the colour wins it permanently drains 1D10 points each of STR, CON, POW, DEX and APP from the victim, and costs him or her 1D6 hit points as well. Each point of POW so drained increases the colour’s POW. The victim is aware of a sucking, burning sensation and progressively withers and greys. The victim’s face sinks, the skin ageing with hideous cracks and wrinkles. Once drained, the victim dies. 
Mental Attack: A colour can weaken the minds of nearby sentient beings. For each day in the colour’s vicinity, each person must make an opposed INT roll or lose 1D6 magic points and 1D6 Sanity points. Magic points so destroyed cannot be regained without leaving the area. The influence also strongly binds the victim to his or her home and the influence becomes increas­ingly irresistible as the victim’s will weakens. To leave the area, he or she must make a successful Hard or Extreme POW roll (half POW if magic points are reduced by 50% or one-fifth of POW if magic points have been reduced to 0 or less), or be inexplicably compelled to stay. 
Drain Opposed roll: victim’s POW vs. Colour’s POW, damage 1D6 
+ characteristics loss Mental Attack Opposed roll: victim’s INT vs. Colour’s POW, dam­
age 1D6 magic points + 1D6 Sanity points Dodge 47% (23/9) 


Armor: None—invulnerable to physical attack except by strong magnetic fields, which can imprison it. Vulnerable to magic. Sanity Loss: 0/1D4 Sanity points to see a colour; 1/1D8 Sanity 
points to see a victim of a colour. 

Crawling Ones 
Wisely did Ibn Schacabao say, that happy the town at night whose wizards are all ashes. For it is of old rumor that the soul of the devil-bought hastes not from his charnel clay, buts fats and instructs the very worm that gnaws; till out of corruption horrid life springs, and the dull scavengers of earth wax crafty to vex it and swell monstrous to plague it. Great holes secretly are digged where earth’s pores ought to suffice, and things have learnt to walk that ought to crawl. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Festival 

A crawling one is composed of thousands of worms and mag­gots. Each worm is individually alive and constantly moves, though they generally hold the shape of a human body. The collective mass of wriggling creatures possesses the ‘mind’ of a dead sorcerer, long since devoured by the maggoty horde. The ingested ‘will’ of the wizard effectively driving the mass to work collectively to perform deeds and actions. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Crawling ones cannot speak but can write messages. It is un­necessary for them to use spoken words in performing spells or when communing with their alien masters or creatures from beyond. 
Spells: Each crawling one knows at least 1D10 spells. 
CRAWLING ONES, wriggling masters of sorcery 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  45  (1D6+6 x5)  
CON  70  (4D6 x5)  
SIZ  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
INT  65  (4D6 x5)  
POW  100  (2D6 x5)  
DEX  35  (2D6 x5)  
HP: 13  

Average Damage Bonus: none. Average Build: 0 Average Magic Points: 20 Move: 8 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 
Crawling One 
Fighting attacks: Crawling ones can use weapons as humans do, however they prefer to use spells or their minions to undertake physical tasks. 
Fighting 35% (17/7), damage 1D3 (unarmed) or by weapon type Dodge 20% (10/4) Armor: None, however due to the soft and resilient quality of the crawling one’s bodies, normal weapons do minimal damage to the things. Bullets only cause a single point of damage, except for shotgun pellets, which do minimum damage for that type of firearm. Skills: Stealth 60%. Sanity Loss: 1D3/2D6 Sanity points to see a crawling one. 
Dagon & Hydra (Unique Beings) 
Vast, Polyphemous-like, and loathsome, it darted like a stupendous monster of nightmares to the monolith, about which it flung its gigantic scaly arms. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, Dagon 

Father Dagon and Mother Hydra are deep ones who have grown enormously in size and age, each over 20 feet tall and perhaps millions of years old. They rule the deep ones and lead them in their worship of Cthulhu. This pair is active and mobile, unlike Cthulhu and his minions, but are rarely met. Dagon and Hydra’s characteristics are identical. It is possible that more than two deep ones have grown to the 
Dagon & Hydra 
enormous size and strength comparable to that described in Lovecraft’s Dagon. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Each knows all Summon and Bind spells and Con­tact spells. 
DAGON & HYDRA, Rulers of the Deep Ones 
STR 260 CON 250 SIZ 300 DEX 100 Damage Bonus: +6D6 Build: 7 Magic Points: 30 Move: 10/15 swimming  INT 100  POW 150 HP 55  
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2  

Fighting attacks: These huge monsters can strike investigators in a variety of ways, kicking, clawing, punching, stamping, etc. 
Fighting 80% (40/18), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 50% (25/10) Armor: 6-point skin. 
Sanity Loss: 1/1D10 Sanity points to see Dagon or Hydra. 

Dark Young 
Something black in the road, something that wasn’t a tree. 
Something big and black and ropy, just squatting there, 
waiting, with ropy arms squirming and reaching… It came 
crawling up the hillside…and it was the black thing of 
my dreams—that black, ropy, slimy jelly tree-thing out of 
the woods. It crawled up and it flowed up on its hoofs and 
mouths and snaky arms. 
—Robert Bloch, Notebook Found in a Deserted House 

These beings are enormous writhing masses, formed out of ropy black tentacles. Here and there over the surfaces of the things are great puckered mouths that drip green goo. 
Beneath the creatures, tentacles end in black hooves, on which they stamp. The monsters roughly resemble trees in silhouette—the trunks being the short legs, and the tops of the trees represented by the ropy, branching bodies. The whole mass of these things smell like open graves. Dark young stand between 12 and 20 feet tall. 
Such entities are the “young” referred to in Shub-Niggu­rath’s epithet, “Black Goat of the Woods with a Thousand Young”. They are closely connected to her, and are found only in areas where she is worshiped. Dark young act as proxies for Shub-Niggurath in accepting sacrifices, ac­cepting worship from cultists, devouring non-cultists, and spreading their mother’s faith across the world. Luckily, they are rarely met with. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Each dark young knows a number of spells equal to a tenth of its INT. 
DARK YOUNG of Shub-Niggurath 
char. averages rolls 
STR 220 (4D6+30 x5) CON 80 (3D6+6 x5) SIZ 220 (4D6+30 x5) INT 70 (4D6 x5) POW 90 (5D6 x5) DEX 80 (3D6+6 x5) Hit Points: 30 Average Damage Bonus: 4D6 Average Build: 5 Average Magic Points: 18 Move: 8 
Dark Young 


ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 5. It may only use its Trample attack once per round. 
Fighting attacks: In its masses of tentacles, a typical dark young has four thicker sinuous tentacles with which it attacks. Each of these thicker tentacles can strike out to injure. It may also kick out with its hooves or simply crush or strike with its massive bulk. 
Grab (mnvr): The Dark Young can use its tentacles to grab and capture up to four victims. If a victim is grabbed, he or she is held to one of the horrible sucking mouths and drained of 
not be restored. a victim is capable only of writhing and screaming. 
Trample: The dark young can also tram­ple with its massive hooves, 
are situated close together). Fighting 80% (40/16), damage bonus 
drain per round 
Deep One 

Dodge 40% (20/8) Armor: Dark young are of 
point of damage per bullet (2 points for an impale). Hand­to-hand weapons do normal damage. Attacks dependent on heat, blast, corrosion, electrical charge or poisoning have no effect. 
Skills: Stealth (bonus die in woods) 30%. 
Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D10 Sanity points to see a dark young. 

Deep Ones 
I think their predominant colour was a greyish-green, though they had white bellies. They were mostly shiny and slippery, but the ridges of their backs were scaly. Their forms vaguely suggested the anthropoid, while their heads were the heads of fish, with prodigious bulging eyes that never closed. At the 
sides of their necks were palpitating gills and their long paws were webbed. They hopped irregularly, sometimes on hind legs and sometimes on four… their croaking, baying voices… held all the dark shades of expression which their staring faces lacked. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow over Innsmouth 

The deep ones are an amphibious race that primarily serves Cthulhu and two beings known as Father Dagon and Mother 
 unbelievably cruel 
 unknown in  and globally  all submerged be­neath the waves. One is off the coast  Massachusetts, near Innsmouth, 
Deep ones may be worshiped by 
unless slain, and so are any hybrid 

SPECIAL POWERS 
Breathe under Water: Dwelling under the sea, deep ones re­quire no exterior help to breathe underwater and are equally capable of breathing on land. 
Spells: Deep ones have a 40% chance of knowing 1D4 spells. 
DEEP ONES, Gilled masters of the deep seas 
char. averages rolls 
STR 70 (4D6 x5) CON 50 (3D6 x5) SIZ 80 (3D6+6 x5) INT 65 (2D6+6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) Hit Points: 13 Average Damage Bonus: 1D4 Average Build: 1 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 8/10 Swimming 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Deep ones can use weapons as humans do. They 
are skilled with their spears and tridents. Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 + damage bonus or by weapon type (e.g. spear, damage 1D8 + damage bonus) 
Dodge 25% (12/5) Armor: 1-point skin and scales. Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a deep one. 



Deep One Hybrids 
It was a thin, stoop-shouldered man not 
much under six feet tall… His age was 
perhaps thirty-five, but the odd, deep 
creases in the sides of his neck made 
him seem older when one did not 
study his dull, expressionless face. He 
had a narrow head bulging, watery 
blue eyes that seemed never to wink, 
a flat nose, a receding forehead and 
chin, and singularly underdeveloped 
ears. His long, thick lip and coarse 
pored, greyish cheeks seemed 
almost beardless except for 
some sparse yellow hairs that 
straggled and curled in irregular patches; and in places the 
surface seemed queerly irregular, as if peeling from some 
cutaneous disease. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow over Innsmouth 
Deep one hybrids are the progeny of deep one and human mating. Although the offspring of such unions are usually born as normal humans, changes in appearance and phys­iology tend to occur in late teens—commonly known as the ‘Innsmouth Look’. By middle age, most hybrids display some form of gross deformity and such individuals retire to the privacy of their close-shuttered homes. Within a few years, the hybrid undergoes the final transformation into a deep one and embarks on a new life in the sea. 
The physical changes are accompanied by an awakening of new senses, strange dreams of undersea cities and a long­ing to visit seaside locales—particularly ancestral homes or the individual’s birth place. 
Typically, hybrids inhabit remote coastal villages, how­ever they can be found further afield (particularly in the early stages of their transformation). As the final transfor­mations take place the hybrid either learns to embrace their monstrous heritage or goes mad in the process. 
Deep ones will attempt to lure hybrids to their lairs or places of safety, where they can supervise the final metamor­phosis and ensure the hybrid is appropriately schooled in their shared heritage. About 10% of hybrids do not com­plete the transformation and are doomed to spend the rest of their life as a half-human half-deep one, whilst a further 10% do not undergo the metamorphosis at all, with the deep one genes essentially missing a generation—only to manifest in a future generation. 

SPECIAL POWERS 
Breathe underwater: Hybrids are unable to breathe un­derwater until they have undergone the full change in to a deep one; however, from early childhood onwards they can remain underwater for up to twice as long as the average human. 
Spells: Older hybrids who have begun to embrace their watery heritage have a 10% chance of knowing 1D3 spells. 
DEEP ONE HYBRID, Innsmouth-Tainted Progeny of the 
Deep  
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
CON  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
SIZ  52  (3D6 x5)  
INT  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
POW  50  (3D6 x5)  
DEX  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
APP  35  (2D6 x5)  
HP: 11  

Average Damage Bonus: none. Average Build: 0 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 8/8 Swimming 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Deep one hybrids can use weapons as humans 
do. Fighting 45% (22/9), damage per weapon type + damage bonus or by weapon type. Dodge 30% (15/6) Armor: None. Skills: Jump 45%, Listen 50%, Stealth 46%, Swim 60%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D4 Sanity points to see a deep one hybrid, although this may be increased (1/1D6+) for particularly monstrous specimens. 
Dholes 
Below him the ground was festering with gigantic Dholes, and even as he looked, one reared up several hundred feet and levelled a bleached, viscous end at him. —H.P. Lovecraft and E. Hoffman Price, Through the Gate of 
the Silver Key 

Dholes are gigantic wormlike burrowing horrors. They are not native to the Earth and none seem to have been brought here for more than brief periods, fortunately, for they seem to have riddled and laid waste to several other worlds. They dislike light, though it does not visibly harm them. They are only rarely seen in daylight, and then only on planets that they have thoroughly conquered. Some unknown relation between dholes and chthonians may exist. Similar creatures, bholes, exist in the Dreamlands. 
DHOLES, Burrowing horrors 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  2525  (10D100 x5)  
CON  755  (1D100+100 x5)  
SIZ  2775  (1D100+STR x5)  
INT  35  (2D6 x5)  
POW  170  (10D6 x5)  
DEX  10  (1D4 x5)  
HP: 353  

Average Damage Bonus: enough to flatten a battleship (64D6) Average Build: 65 Average Magic Points: 35 Move: 15 Crawl/10 Burrow 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 1 
Fighting attacks: The massive, fast-moving bulk of these things is very dangerous for fleshy mortals to approach. A blow from its bulk is like being hit by a train. If a dhole crushes an investiga­tor, death is automatic. With a successful Luck roll, enough can be found to bury. 
Goo Attack: In lieu of swallowing or crushing a target, a dhole can spit a gob of slimy goo from its mouth up to a range of 2-3 miles. The goo covers a circular area with a diameter equal to 1% of the monster’s SIZ in feet: thus a dhole of SIZ 2750 spits a glob 27 feet across, big enough to bring down an airplane. 
Any living thing struck by the glob is stunned and engulfed. Climbing out of a mass of goo requires an Extreme STR roll; make one attempt per round. While buried in the frightful slime, the investigator cannot breathe and begins to drown. In addition, the caustic slime costs the investigator 1 hit point per round her or she is held. Once the victim escapes, the burning damage stops. 
Engulf: If a dhole swallows (engulfs) someone, it scoops clean an area equal in size to the area of its goo attack. 
Fighting 30% (15/6), damage death 
Spit Goo 50% (25/10), damage special 
Engulf 80% (40/16), damage swallowed 
Dodge 6% (3/1) 
Armor points: Equal one-fifth of the dhole’s POW. 
Sanity Loss: 1D4/1D20 Sanity points to see a dhole. 


Dimensional Shamblers 
Shuffling towards him in the darkness was the gigantic, blasphemous form of a thing not wholly ape and not wholly insect. Its hide hung loosely upon its frame, and its rugose, dead-eyed rudiment of a head swayed drunkenly from side to side. Its forepaws were extended, with talons spread wide, and its whole body was taut with murderous malignity despite its utter lack of facial description. —H.P. Lovecraft and Hazel Heald, The Horror in the Museum 
Little is known about these beings save their name and a description of a hide. It is assumed that they are entities capable of walking between the planes and worlds of the universe, never spending much time at any one location. 
Rumors suggest that these entities occasionally serve a God or a Great Old One, however their individual motiva­tions and purpose remain a mystery. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Trans-dimensional Travel: Able to leave a plane of existence at will, signaling the change by beginning to shimmer and fade. This transition costs them 4 magic points and takes a round to complete. During this time they may be attacked, however they may not inflict damage on their attackers. 
A shambler can take objects or beings with it when it fades into another dimension. By clutching the desired object in its talons and expending an additional magic point per 50 SIZ points of the object or creature, that which is held 
Dimensional Shambler 

DIMENSIONAL SHAMBLERS, Dimension-hopping travellers 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  95  (2D6+12 x5)  
CON  80  (3D6+6 x5)  
SIZ  95  (2D6+12 x5)  
INT  35  (2D6 x5)  
POW  50  (3D6 x5)  
DEX  50  (3D6 x5)  
HP: 17  

Average Damage Bonus: +1D6. Average Build: 2 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 7 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: Dimensional shamblers can attack with both 
fore-claws and general unarmed attacks, they may also attempt to grab an opponent and disappear into another dimension. Fighting 45% (22/9), 1D8 + damage bonus Grab (mnvr) grabbed and held for 1 round before disappearing to 
who knows where Dodge 30% (15/6) Armor: 3-point thick hide. 
Elder Things 

A complete description of one of these beings can be found in At the Mountains of Madness by Lovecraft, it notes that the en­tity stands about eight feet tall, with a six-foot torso and that it has wings, which neatly fold up into slots. In that story this race is referred to as the Old Ones. Elder things communicate by piping whistles and can sense without light. 
Elder things came to Earth a billion years ago and may have accidentally started terrestrial life through arcane ex­perimentation. They created the blasphemous shoggoths to serve as slaves. Their race began to degenerate before man evolved and they at least partially lost their former ability to fly through space on their membranous wings. After nu­merous wars with other races, the mi-go and the star-spawn prime among them, and the rebellion of their former slaves, the shoggoths, the amphibious elder things were eventually driven back to Antarctica in the last few million years, where their last city remains frozen under a glacier. Their civiliza­tion was eventually wiped out by the cold of the ice age. The elder things are extinct on land, however they may still have colonies in the deepest waters. 
Time-travelling witches and sorcerers have sometimes sought out elder things in order to further their learning and understanding of the universe and Mythos matters. Such testimony also hints at non-degenerate elder things still living among the stars. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Elder things have a 70% chance of knowing 1D4 spells. 
Technology: See the Chapter 13: Artifacts and Alien Devices for further information. 
ELDER THINGS, Mysterious scientists from the dawn of 
time  
char. STR CON SIZ INT POW DEX HP: 25  140 50 80  averages 190 110 (8D6 x5) 80 (3D6 x5) (3D6+6 x5)  rolls (4D6+24 x5) (3D6+6 x5) (1D6+12 x5)  
Elder Thing  

of a starfish. 
—H.P. Lovecraft 


Average Damage Bonus: +3D6 Average Build: 4 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 8/10 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 5 Fighting attacks: An elder thing may use its tentacles and its bulk 
to strike at opponents. 
Seize (mnvr): Once a tentacle grips, it clings to the victim and each round thereafter the victim loses hit points equal to half the elder thing’s damage bonus in constriction and crushing damage. Each elder thing has five tentacles, therefore no more than five victims may be held in this way. 
Fighting 40% (20/8), damage bonus Seize (mnvr) seizes target, followed by ½ damage bonus in con­striction each round Dodge 40% (20/8) Armor: 7-point skin. Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see an elder thing. 
Fire Vampires 
These appeared as thousands of tiny points of light…The myriad points of light were living entities of flame! Where they touched, fire sprang up. 
—August Derleth, The Dweller in Darkness 

Fire vampires are minions of the Great Old One named Cthugha and, like him, dwell on or near the star Fomalhaut. They come to Earth when summoned or when accompany­ing Cthugha. They appear to be a form of intelligent gas or plasma. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Fire vampires have a 20% chance of knowing 1D3 spells. 
FIRE VAMPIRES, The flame feeders 
char. averages rolls 
STR N/A CON 35 (2D6 x5) SIZ 01 (01) INT 50 (3D6 x5) POW 65 (2D+6 x5) DEX 80 (3D6+6 x5) HP: 3 Average Damage Bonus: N/A Average Build: -2 Average Magic Points: 13 Move: 11 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting Attacks: Fire vampires attack by touching their victims 
and can set flammable objects alight by touch. They damage humans by heat-shock. To determine the heat-shock roll 2D6 damage for the vampire’s attack. If the investigator passes a CON roll, half of this damage is taken, if failed the full damage is inflicted. 
In the same attack, the vampire will try to steal magic points from its target: an opposed POW roll. If the vampire wins, it steals 
Fire Vampire 
1D10 magic points from the victim. If the target wins the roll, the fire vampire loses one of its own magic points. Thus, in each attack by a fire vampire, roll twice—once to determine heat damage and once to determine magic point loss. 
Fighting  85% (42/17), damage 2D6 burn + magic point drain Dodge 40% (20/8) Armor: Standard material weapons cannot harm them, (blades, bul­lets, etc.) Water costs a fire vampire one hit point per half-gallon poured over it, a typical handheld fire extinguisher does 1D6 hit points of damage to it, whilst a bucket of water costs it 1D3 hit points. Sanity Loss: 0/D6 Sanity points for seeing a fire vampire. 
Flying Polyps 
A horrible elder race of half polypous, utterly alien entities… They were only partly material and had the power of aerial motion, despite the absence of wings…Suggestions of a monstrous plasticity and of temporary lapses of visibility… singular whistling noises and colossal foot-prints made up of five circular toe marks seemed also to be associated with 
them. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Out of Time 

This unnamed species came to Earth from space as con­querors about seven hundred and fifty million years ago. They built basalt cities with high windowless towers and inhabited three other planets in the solar system as well. On Earth, they warred with the Great Race of Yith and were finally defeated and forced underground, At the close of the Cretaceous era (about 50 million years ago) they rose up from their subterranean haunts and extracted their revenge by exterminating the Great Race. 
Polyps still remain in their deep caverns and seem con­tent to remain there, annihilating the few beings who chance upon them. The entrances to their dwellings are mostly deep within ancient ruins where there are great wells sealed over with stone. Inside these wells dwell the polyps still, ferocious alien fighters with a bewildering variety of attacks. 
Ancient tales tell that they have the power to control great winds; able to cause devastation, as well as target individuals. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Invisibility: By spending 1 magic point per round, a polyp can turn totally invisible, however it still can be roughly located by the constant nauseating piping sound that always accompanies it. Anyone trying to hit an invisible polyp must make a successful Listen roll to tell where it is, though if located, any rolls to hit it are made with one penalty die. 
Polyps always are phasing in and out of visibility, so a Luck roll must be made with each attack made upon it, if the Luck roll is failed the Polyp phases just at that moment and the attack is made with one penalty die. When a polyp is invisible, it does not attack with its tentacles, but may still use one of the wind attacks or cast spells. 
Spells: Polyps have a 70% chance of knowing 1D10 spells. 
FLYING POLYPS, Terrors from the blackness below 
char. averages rolls 
STR 250 (4D6+36 x5) CON 125 (2D6+18 x5) SIZ 250 (4D6+36 x5) INT 70 (4D6 x5) POW 80 (3D6+6 x5) DEX 65 (2D6+6 x5) HP: 37 Average Damage Bonus: +5D6 (but use only for Wind Blast) Average Build: 6 Average Magic Points:16 Move: 8/12 flying 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 2D6 (each round, roll 2D6 to determine how many tentacles form); may use only one wind-based attack per round. 
Fighting Attacks: 
from their bodies. Tentacle 
The wound takes the form of desiccation of tissue. Note: Each of 
round to use. 
Wind Blast: 
base range of yard diameter cylinder of effect emanating from the polyp, do­
damage bonus. 
multiple of target at 39 yards would take bonus minus 1D6), would take 3D6 damage. literally have 

Fixing Attack: This is a mysterious method for capturing prey. In this mode, the wind attack has a range of 1,000 yards and can blow without diminishment around corners or up through winding corridors. Although the wind emanates from the pol­yp, it has a peculiar sucking effect on the target, slowing down him or her and forcing the target to make an opposed STR roll versus the polyp’s POW. Beyond 200 yards this becomes less effective and one bonus die is granted. If the polyp wins, the victim cannot move away that round. If the target wins, he or she may move normally. The flying polyp can move at full speed while using this ability, so it may be both chasing interesting prey and slowing it. 
This technique may be used on multiple targets within 30 yards of one another. The second target gains one bonus die on the STR roll to oppose the polyp, the third gains two bonus dice and so on. The polyp may choose its targets. 
Windstorm Attack: A polyp can generate a wind in conjunction with its fellows. The windstorm has a speed of half a mile per hour per point of POW of the participating polyp. This windstorm is local, losing 5 mph of force for every 200 yards it travels. A group of polyps can generate hurricane-force winds within an area of a few square miles. Targets take 1D4 damage for every 20 mph above 100 mph of wind speed; those that succeed in a Luck roll take half damage. 
Fighting 85% (42/17), damage 1D10 
Wind blast  70% (35/14), damage bonus (lowered by 1D6 per 20 yards distance) 
Dodge 30% (15/6) 
Armor: 4 points, plus invisibility. The extra-terrene polyp takes only minimum damage from physical weapons, which is reduced again by 4 points due to the monster’s skin armor. Enchanted weapons do full normal damage, as do forces such as heat or electricity. 
Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D20 Sanity points to see a flying polyp. 
Formless Spawn 
When the men of K’n-Yan went down into N’Kai’s black abyss 
—H.P. Lovecraft and Zealia Bishop, The Mound
 from toad-like They ooze through 
they have lost. 

Flying Polyp 

SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Formless spawn have a 25% chance of knowing 1 spell. Of those, 2% know many spells. 
FORMLESS SPAWN, Shape-shifting horrors 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  90  (1D6+6 x5 to 6D6+6 x5)  
CON  50  (3D6 x5)  
SIZ  120  (1D6+12 x5 to 6D6+12 x5)  
INT  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
POW  50  (3D6 x5)  
DEX  95  (2D6+12 x5)  
HP: 17  

Average Damage Bonus: +2D6. Average Build: 3 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 12 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 2 (limited to 1 Bite per round) 
Fighting attacks: Due to their extreme fluidity they are able to attack in a wide variety of ways, forming whips, tentacles and other appendages with which to bludgeon and strike its opponents. 
Bite: The victim is instantly swallowed. Each round thereafter the victim takes 1 point of damage from constriction—the damage done per round progressively increasing by 1 point (e.g., on the second round 2 points of damage are taken, and so forth). While swallowed, the victim may take no action whatsoever, though friends may attempt to slay the monster to free him or her. A formless spawn can make one Bite attack per round and can continue to swallow prey until having swallowed its own SIZ in prey. While digesting a victim, a spawn may continue to fight but may not shift location without disgorging what it has swallowed. 
Grab (mnvr): Grabs an opponent using one of its whip like appendages; range is always one-fifth of the monster’s SIZ in yards. 
Fighting 60% (30/12), damage 2D6 + damage bonus 
Grab (mnvr) damage 1D6 + damage bonus 
Bite 30% (15/6), damage swallowed 
Dodge 47% (23/9) 
Armor: Immune to all physical weapons, even enchanted ones— wounds simply snap closed after being opened. Spells may affect them, as may fire, chemicals or other forces. 
Sanity Loss: 1/1D10 Sanity points to see a formless spawn. 
Formless Spawn 
Ghasts 
Repulsive beings which die in the light…and leap on long 
hind legs…a pair of yellowish red eyes…Ghasts have indeed 
an excellent sense of smell…something about the size of a 
small horse hopped out into the grey twilight, and Carter 
turned sick at the aspect of that scabrous and unwholesome 
beast, whose face is so curiously human despite the absence 
of a nose, a forehead, and other particulars…They spoke in 
coughing gutturals. 

—H. P. Lovecraft, The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath 
Ghasts are restricted to the underworld and vast caverns where sunlight never comes. Exposed to direct sunlight, they sicken and eventually die. Ghasts are cannibalistic and eat one another as well as other beings they catch. 
The horrible, semi-human bipeds that are ridden by the highly scientific but morally degenerate humans inhabiting the cavern of K’n-Yan may be relatives of or even be exam­ples of ghasts. If this is the case, then ghasts are likely the result of serpent people genetic experimentation. Ghasts are evidently tamable, though primitive and savage. 
GHASTS, Unwholesome scabrous beasts 
char. averages rolls 
STR 110 (3D6+12 x5) CON 70 (4D6 x5) SIZ 130 (4D6+12 x5) INT 15 (1D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 65 (2D6+6 x5) HP: 20 Average Damage Bonus: +2D6. Average Build: 3 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 10 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: Ghasts have the usual 
range of unarmed attacks open to 
humanoids. Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 
+ damage bonus Dodge 35% (17/7) Armor: None. 
Skills: Stealth 70%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D8 Sanity points to see a ghast. 
Ghouls 
These figures were seldom completely human, but often approached humanity in varying degree. Most of the bodies, while roughly bipedal, had a forward slumping, and a vaguely canine cast. The texture of the majority was a kind of unpleasant rubberiness. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, Pickman’s Model 

Ghouls are loathsome humanoids with rubbery skin, hoof-like feet, canine features and claws. They speak in what are described as gibberings and meepings. They are often encrusted with grave mold collected as they feed. 

They dwell in tunnel systems beneath many cities, often centered on graveyards and ancient catacombs. They are known to have commerce with witches and those seeking unspeakable pleasures, although an unwitting human is more like to be attacked when encountered. 
Dark lore suggests that it is possible for a human to transform into a ghoul over a prolonged period. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: ghouls have a 15% chance of knowing 1D10 spells. 
GHOULS, Mocking Charnel feeders 
char. averages rolls 
STR 80 (3D6+6 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 65 (2D6+6 x5) INT 65 (2D6+6 x5) POW 65 (2D6+6 x5) DEX 65 (2D6+6 x5) HP: 13 Average Damage Bonus: 1D4 Average Build: 1 Average Magic Points: 13 Move: 9 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 3 Fighting attacks: Ghouls have the usual range of unarmed attacks 
open to humanoids. Also ghouls have their claws that are razor-sharp and filthy; these bony protrusions slice through human flesh in an instant. Wounds caused may become dis­eased if not treated. 
Bite and hold (mnvr): If the ghoul’s bite strikes home it hangs on instead of Ghoul using claw attacks and worries the victim with its fangs, continuing to do 1D4 damage automatically per round. An opposed STR roll is required to dislodge the ghoul, breaking the hold and ending the bite damage. 
Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Bite and hold (mnvr) damage 1D4 per round Dodge 40% (20/8) Armor: Firearms and projectiles do half of rolled damage; round down any fraction. Skills: Climb 85%, Stealth 70%, Jump 75%, Listen 70%, Spot Hidden 50%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a ghoul. 


Gla'aki, Servants of 
A hand came scrabbling up out to lever it up!…the hand of a corpse—bloodless and skeletal, and with impossibly long, cracked nails. 
—R. Campbell, The Inhabitant of the Lake 

Gla'aki’s slaves are undead things created by his spines. They share Gla'aki’s memories and become almost a part of the Great Old One, though they can still perform many individual actions. 
At first they look human enough, if stiff and corpselike, but in time they wither and look like the undead monsters they are. After six decades of half-death, the servants of Gla'aki become subject to the Green Decay if exposed to intense light, such as daylight. The Green Decay begins rot on the spot, destroying one so exposed in a few hours. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Servants of Gla'aki do not generally have any spells, though they retain any they learnt while alive, plus any new spells taught by Gla'aki (at the Keeper’s discretion). 
SERVANTS OF GLA'AKI, Decaying slaves 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  50  (3D6 x5)  
CON  105  (3D6 x10)  
SIZ  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
INT  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
POW  50  (3D6 x5)  
DEX  15  (1D6 x5)  
HP: 17  

Average Damage Bonus: none. Average Build: 0 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 5 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Servants of 
Gla'aki have the usual range of unarmed attacks open to humanoids, or they may be armed, typically with a sickle. 

Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D3 + damage bonus or by weapon (typically a sickle, damage 1D6 + 1 
+ damage bonus) 

Dodge 10% (5/2) Armor: None. 
Servant of Gla'aki 

Sanity Loss: No Sanity point loss if human-seeming; 1/1D8 Sanity 
points lost if in living-corpse aspect; if dead from Green Decay, 
1/1D10 Sanity points to see. 
Gnoph-Keh 
Gnoph-Keh, the hairy myth-thing of the Greenland ice, that walked sometimes on two legs, sometimes on four, and sometimes on six. 
— H.P. Lovecraft and Hazel Heald, The Horror in the Museum 

In earlier stories, Gnoph-Keh appears to be a single being, however later it seems to be a race of beings, possible even a degenerate tribe. Here we assume that it is a sparse race of beings, associated with Ithaqua. 
Usually only one gnoph-keh is encountered at a time and the race is generally restricted to glaciers, ice caps and extremely cold and icy areas. Especially harsh winters may bring them down into the lowlands. If a human tribe have indeed named themselves after the fabled gnoph-keh, per­haps they worship the gnoph-keh as a deity or use it as a totem beast. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Blizzard: The gnoph-keh has the power to summon a small blizzard about itself, restricting visibility to 3 yards maximum. This costs the creature 1 magic point per hour and yields a blizzard with a radius of 100 yards. That radius may be increased by 100 more yards for every extra magic point expended. On the rare occasions that two or more gnoph-kehs work together, they may combine their magic points to create gigantic blizzards. The blizzard will always be centered on the gnoph-keh. 
Every 15 minutes that an investigator spends within such a blizzard, the player must make a CON roll or have his or her 
Gnoph-Keh 

investigator lose 1 hit point to freezing damage (if not properly protected against the ice and wind). Note that no recovery of hit points may take place while exposed to the blizzard. 
Generate Cold: The gnoph-keh can also create an intense cold around its body by expending magic points. For each magic point the gnoph-keh spends, the temperature goes down by 20°F for an hour in a 100-yard radius. If the crea­ture desires, it can combine the cold and blizzard attacks to create a terrifying local storm. 
Spells: Gnoph-keh have a 75% chance of knowing 1D10 spells. 
GNOPH-KEH, Fiends of the ice 
char. averages rolls 
STR 155 (2D6+24 x5) CON 110 (3D6+12 x5) SIZ 155 (2D6+24 x5) INT 75 (1D6+12 x5) POW 105 (6D6 x5) DEX 70 (4D6 x5) HP: 26 Average Damage Bonus: +3D6 Average Build: 4 Average Magic Points: 21 Move: 9 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 5 (only 1 Horn Gore per round). Fighting attacks: The gnoph-keh may attack with its vicious claws 
and tremendous bulk. Horn Gore: Once per round the gnoph-keh may bring its terrible horn to bear on one target. Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 + damage bonus 
Horn Gore 65% (32/13), damage 1D10 + damage bonus Dodge 35% (17/7) Armor: 9 points of gristle, fur and hide. Sanity Loss: 0/1D10 Sanity points for seeing a gnoph-keh. 
. . Surmounting this 
through expansion and contraction. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Out of Time 
A species of time travelling mental entities, fleeing their own world’s destruction. They came to Earth and took over the minds and bodies of the cone-shaped beings dwelling here. The combination of the Earth-born bodies and the minds of the aliens made the Great Race. They taught their young their own technology and culture. Those young grew up as true inheritors of the mentalists and the new bodies were natural to them. In the aeons that followed, the Great Race divided up the Earth between themselves, the mi-go, and Cthulhu’s kin. Cthulhu and his kind ruled from the Pacific and the lost lands of R’lyeh and Mu. The mi-go controlled the North, whilst in the south the Great Race were supreme. Their greatest city was Pnakotus, in modern-day Australia. 
This race flourished from about four hundred million years ago until fifty million years ago, when they were ex­terminated by the flying polyps, an ancient race which they had imprisoned when they first came to Earth. However, the minds of the Great Race had foreseen their doom and so fled their cone-shaped bodies, mentally travelling into the future and imposing their minds in the bodies of a beetle-like race destined to succeed mankind—the New Great Race (see page @@). 
The Great Race reproduce by means of spores, but do so infrequently because of their long individual life spans (4,000 to 5,000 years). Members feed solely on liquids. 
The Yithians are a race of socialist individuals. They value intelligence above all else and use it as their criterion for immigration. Resources are shared among their kind out of a sense of intellectual logic and proportion. Strife is rare. The Great Race worship no gods. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Time Travel: The Great Race are so-named because they conquered time so thoroughly—the only race known to have done so. A member of the race can send its mind forward or backward through time and across space, pick out a suitable subject and trade minds with it; whenever a member of the Great Race takes over the body of a being, that being’s mind is transferred into the body of the Great Race individual, there to stay until the being now inhabiting its old body sees fit to return and trade places once more. With this technique the race has travelled en masse through time and space and conquered other planets. 
Keen students of history, an individual exchanges places with a select individual in the era it wishes to study. The minds are switched for about five years. On Earth, friends notice many differences about the substitute: an INT roll would be appropriate to notice this. 
Once forced into the alien Great Race body the victim is caused to write down everything known about his or her own time. The Great Race are fairly kindly and permit their cap­tives to travel about and see the country, as well as allowing them to meet other victims like themselves, generally from far distant planets or eras. When the time comes to restore a victim to his or her own body, the Great Race blanks all memory of what has happened while the victim was trapped in their age. This erasure is imperfect: the victim may dream and have nightmares of being held by the Great Race. 

A cult on present-day Earth aids and abets Great Race visitors. In exchange, the visitors share technological or magical knowledge. Time-travel is the primary means by which a member of this race could be met in its original cone-body, though there have been scattered cases involving stasis cubes and sorcerous summonings across the aeons. 
Spells: Yithians rarely learn magic; each one has a 10% chance of knowing 1D3 spells. 
GREAT RACE OF YITH, Mental time-travellers 
char. averages rolls 
STR 210 (12D6 x5) CON 130 (4D6+12 x5) SIZ 320 (8D6+36 x5) INT 100 (4D6+6 x5) POW 65 (2D6+6 x5) DEX 50 (2D6+3 x5) HP: 45 Average Damage Bonus: +6D6 Average Build: 7 Average Magic Points: 13 Move: 7 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 (the Lightning Gun may only be fired once each round). 
Fighting attacks: In combat, a member of this race may use its pincers to attack. It also possesses great size that it may use to crush or hit an investigator. However, this civilized race avoids hand-to-hand combat, preferring weapons that fire great gouts of the flying polyps. 
Lightning Gun: 
Yithian 
(see page 
shot, past 4 fired at 
7 charges were 

or less. Each charge does of 
points of 

Fighting 
Lightning Gun 30% 
Dodge 25% (12/5) Armor: 8-point skin Skills: Biology 80%, Chemistry 70%, Electrical Repair 60%, Psy­
chology 30%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see one of the Great Race.
 Hounds of Tindalos 
“They are lean and athirst!” he shrieked . . .“All the evil in the 
universe was concentrated in their lean, hungry bodies. Or 
had they bodies? I saw them only for a moment, I cannot 
be certain.” 
—Frank Belknap Long, The Hounds of Tindalos 

The hounds of Tindalos dwell in the distant past of the earth, when normal life has not yet advanced past one-celled animals. They inhabit the angles of time, while other beings (such as mankind and all common life) descend from curves. This concept is hard to imagine and only seems to be used with respect to them. The hounds lust after something in mankind and other normal life, following victims through time and space to get it. They are immortal. 
Just what these creatures look like is unknown, since those who meet them seem not to survive. A hound of Tin­dalos is unlikely to look like a hound dog and more like to be some form of alien terror consisting of razor-sharp teeth and claws, burning eyes and pulsating blue-tinged skin. 
Because of their relationship with the angles of time, they can materialize through any corner if it is sharp (120° or less). The rooms of most human houses have walls that meet at 90°. When a hound manifests, it first appears as smoke pouring from the corner, from which the head and then the thing’s body emerges. 
Once a human (usually an unwitting time traveller) has become known to one of these creatures, it will pursue the individual relentlessly to get to him. To figure the time before the hound of Tindalos reaches its prey, determine the number of years between the prey’s present time and the time when spotted by the creature. Then divide the number of years by 100,000,000 to get the number of days travel time for the hound. 
Driven off by a target, a hound of Tindalos usually gives up. Unfortunately, such a creature is difficult to drive off. Friends who come to a target’s aid may also become known by the creature and so will be pursued and attacked. 

SPECIAL POWERS Spells: Each hound knows at least 1D8 spells. 
HOUNDS OF TINDALOS, Scavengers of time 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  80  (3D6+6 x5)  
CON  150  (3D6+20 x5)  
SIZ  85  (3D6+6 x5)  
INT  85  (5D6 x5)  
POW  120  (7D6 x5)  
DEX  50  (3D6 x5)  
HP: 23  

Average Damage Bonus: +1D6 Average Build: 2 Average Magic Points: 24 Move: 6 / 20 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: A hound may use its paws or its bite to attack. A 
hound of Tindalos is covered with a sort of bluish pus (Ichor). When a victim is struck by a Fighting attack, a gout of this mucoid stuff is smeared over him or her. This pus-like stuff is alive and active; doing 2D6 damage to the target, and new damage is done in the same amount for each round that the ichor remains on the victim’s body. The ichor can be wiped off with a rag or towel with a DEX roll. It could also be rinsed off with water or some other agent. Fire would kill the ichor, though 1D6 hit points would be lost to burns from the flame. 
Tongue: Once per round, with a successful tongue attack, a deep penetrating (though bloodless and painless) hole is formed. The victim takes no physical damage, despite the peculiar wound, but loses 3D6 POW permanently. 
Fighting 90% (45/18), damage 1D6 + damage bonus + ichor (2d6 damage per round, ongoing until removed) Armor: 2-point hide; regenerates 4 hit points per round, unless 


on 0 hit points; mundane weapons have no effect on a hound, 
though enchanted weapons and spells do full damage. 
Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D20 Sanity points to see a hound of Tindalos. 
Hunting Horrors 
And in the air about him were great viperine creatures, which 
had curiously distorted heads, and grotesquely great clawed 
appendages, supporting themselves with ease by the aid of 
black rubbery wings of singularly monstrous dimensions. 
—August Derleth, The Lurker at the Threshold 
Resembling enormous ropy black serpents or worms possessing bat-like or umbrella-like wings, the form of a hunting horror continually shifts and changes, twitching and writhing, so it is hard to look at them. They may have only a single large wing rather than two. They speak in great harsh voices. A hunting horror’s length averages forty feet. 
These beings are dispelled by daylight. A strong enough burst of light (from a nuclear reaction, perhaps) could sear one to dust. Hunting horrors move swiftly and are harri­er-creatures for some of the gods, particularly Nyarlathotep. They can be summoned in their own right and sent to seek 
Lloigor 

SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Hunting horrors have a 25% chance of knowing 2D10 spells. 
HUNTING HORRORS, Great viperine flyers 
char. averages rolls 
STR 145 (5D6+12 x5) CON 50 (3D6 x5) SIZ 205 (5D6+12 x5) INT 75 (1D6+12 x5) POW 105 (6D6 x5) DEX 65 (3D6+3 x5) HP: 25 Average Damage Bonus: 3D6 Average Build: 4 Average Magic Points: 21 Move: 7 / 11 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: A hunting horror may attack with its bite, its 
crushing bulk and its tail tentacle attacks. 

Grasp (mnvr): The tail can be used to wrap around the victim, preventing movement. The hunting horror may then fly off with its victim or keep fighting. The victim can only break loose as the result of a successful opposed STR roll. When a victim is caught in the tail, the hunting horror may only make a bite attack, nibbling at the dangling victim with a bonus die to hit since the victim’s arms are usually pinioned. 
Fighting  65% (32/13), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Grasp (mnvr) target immobile and must win an opposed STR roll to escape Dodge 35% (17/7) Armor: 9-point skin. Sanity Points: 0/1D10 Sanity points to see a hunting horror. 
Lloigor 
“Invisible ones from the stars.” These latter, he said were definitely aliens on our earth, and the chief among them was called Ghatanothoa, the dark one. They sometimes took forms, such as the monster on the tablet—who was a representation of Ghatanothoa—but existed as vortices of
 should not be 
 Such bodies are 
they have imagina­ Their outlook of 

absolute pessimism results in a pervading atmosphere of gloom that makes lloigor minds and actions incomprehen­sible to humans. Mind-contact with lloigor always leads to suicidal depression for the human partners. 
It is believed that the lloigor originally came to Earth from the Andromeda galaxy and that their first earthly colo­ny was on a lost continent somewhere in the Indian Ocean, possibly the same sunken continent that now bears the city of R’lyeh and its star-spawn with it. The lloigor used hu­man slaves to perform their will and used cruel disciplines to control recalcitrant slaves, such as amputating limbs or causing cancer-like tentacular growths to sprout on them. Earthly lloigor continued to decay and decline, and they retreated under the earth and seas, where they still husband their failing energies. 
Wales, Rhode Island and Iraq are places where lloigor are known to have acted in recent memory. They are hinted at in the folklore of Haiti, Polynesia and Massachusetts. Some Lloigor are linked with the Great Old One Ghatanothoa, whilst others may have connections to or worship Ithaqua. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Drain Magic Points from Humans: Typically their human servants come from families with histories of mental insta­bility, the lloigor need humans to survive as these immaterial entities must draw energy from intelligent beings to perform necessary tasks. By expending one of its own magic points a lloigor may drain 1D6 magic points (per night) from a sleep­ing human to use in performing some magical action. A lloi­gor can drain energy from several sleeping humans at once, from up to several miles away despite intervening obstacles. 
The next morning, the victims wake complaining of headaches and bad sleep. With continued draining, such individuals become physically and spiritually weak, leading to sickness and possibly death. Whenever a victim is drained of any magic points by lloigor in this way, a CON roll (at Regular difficulty level) must be made before any magic points can be recovered. If the CON roll succeeds, the victim regains 1 magic point and wakes. If the roll is failed no mag­ic points are recovered and the victim continues to sleep, whereupon the lloigor may drain another 1D6 magic points from the victim over the next hour, after which another CON roll is attempted and so on. 
Telekinetic Effects: The lloigor can push people and manipu­late objects such as a compass needle or a door latch via tele-kinesis. The (presumably immaterial) lloigor must be directly present and within a few yards of the effect. It takes 10 magic points to create a telekinetic force of STR 5 above ground, 6 magic points to create telekinesis of STR 5 in a subsurface but open area, such as a river bed or canyon, and 3 magic points to cause telekinesis of STR 5 in a tunnel or cave. A group of lloigor might combine telekinesis, increase the STR of the effect and so perform potent deeds. 

Reptilian Manifestation: To take the shape of a monstrous distorted reptile, a lloigor must expend magic points equal to one-fifth of the lloigor’s SIZ. Once the body is formed, it may be maintained indefinitely or dissolved at will. If the lloigor is slain in reptile form, it dies permanently. Several lloigor may combine their magic points to permit a single one to create a physical form quickly. A lloigor in reptile form has all the powers of one in the immaterial mode, except that it cannot pass through walls and is not invisible. 
While in reptilian form, a lloigor has all the character­istics listed below. When immaterial and intangible, it lacks the parenthesized characteristics, skills, etc., possessing only INT, POW, and DEX. 
Spells: Lloigor know at least 1D4 spells. 
LLOIGOR, Masters of telekinesis 
char. averages rolls 
STR 200 (3D6+30 x5) CON 140 (8D6 x5) SIZ 250 (2D4 x50) INT 100 (4D6+6 x5) POW 70 (4D6 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) (HP:) 39 (Average Damage Bonus:) +5D6 Average Build: 6 Average Magic Points: 14 Move: 7 / 3 through stone as immaterial
 ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 (2 while in reptilian form) Fighting attacks: Lloigor can attack in many ways, including 
strikes, claw and bite attacks while in reptilian form. Otherwise they may use one of their special powers or a vortex attack. 
Vortex Attack: The lloigor’s most fearsome weapon is a type of implosion sounding like the roll of distant thunder. Things in the blast area are torn to pieces and the ground is ruptured. At least 100 magic points are needed for an area ten meters in diameter. Everything within the circle loses 1D100 hit points. Alert investigators may notice the tell tale effects of swirling lines appearing in the air and a half-unheard throbbing noise penetrating their bodies. 
Fighting 30% (15/6), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 26% (13/5) Armor: 8-point reptilian hide. In the immaterial state it cannot be harmed by any physical weapons, magical or not. Sanity Loss: 0/1D8 as reptile; invisible—no Sanity loss; mind contact costs 1/1D4 Sanity points. 

Mi-Go, the Fungi from Yuggoth 
They were pinkish things about five feet long; with crusta­ceous bodies bearing vast pairs of dorsal fins or membranous wings and several sets of articulate limbs, and with a sort of convoluted ellipsoid, covered with multitudes of very short antenna, where a head would ordinarily be. . . Sometimes they walked on all their legs and sometimes on the hind-most pair only. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Whisperer in Darkness 
The fungi from Yuggoth are an interstellar race, with a large colony or base on the planet Yuggoth (Pluto). There are mining colonies in the mountains of Earth, where the mi-go seek rare metallic ores. The mi-go are not animal in physiol­ogy, being more akin to a form of fungi. They communicate with each other by changing the colors of their brain-like heads, however they can speak human tongues in buzzing, insect-like voices. 
Unable to eat terrene food, the mi-go must import theirs from other worlds. They are able to fly through the interstel­lar aether on their great wings, however Earth’s atmosphere makes their flying maneuverability clumsy at best. 
Some speculate that the mi-go are pan-dimensional beings, as their bodies seem to resonate at unusual frequen­cies; this becomes most apparent when trying to capture the creatures on film as ordinary photographic plates will not take an image of these beings. Possibly modern high defi­nition digital video or first-rate chemistry could devise an emulsion that might work, however no one having achieved such success has ever come forward. 
When injured, the beings seem able to either regrow or attach new limbs as needed. After death, a mi-go dissolves in to a pool of translucent goo within a few hours. This goo quickly dries out leaving only an oily stain. 
The mi-go worship both Nyarlathotep and Shub-Nig­gurath, and possibly others. They hire or compel human agents to simplify and front their operations on Earth and, consequently, are sometimes connected to cults. Occasional sightings in remote places have become the source of the Abominable Snowman stories told in the Himalayas, as well as perhaps the truth behind supposed encounters with aliens or flying saucers. 
Mi-go are inquisitive scientists, capable of astounding surgical feats, including the placing of living human brains in life-sustaining metal tubes. They can then attach speaking, listening and seeing devices to the tubes, so that the brains can interact with those about them. Such contained brains may then be carried around and taken into the vacuum and cold of space; allowing their favored human servants the opportunity to visit distant stars and other mi-go outposts. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Hypnosis: By introducing ultrahigh and ultralow frequen­cy tones into its buzzing, the mi-go can put one or many humans listening to it into a trance state. Those within forty-feet of a buzzing mi-go must succeed in an opposed POW roll or become incapable of action. Mi-go can speak 
Mi-Go 

telepathically to humans, which costs 1 magic point per 5 rounds. The human can resist the communication with an opposed POW roll. 
Void Light: Creates a sink from which photons will not emerge. The mi-go must spend 1 magic point for every cubic yard of blackness desired. No light can escape the affected area, making a useful visual protection for these fragile aliens. The darkness may be like a sheet or a spherical volume. 
Spells: Mi-go have a 25% chance of knowing 1D3 spells. 
MI-GO, Enigmatic scientists from Yuggoth 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  50  (3D6 x5)  
CON  50  (3D6 x5)  
SIZ  50  (3D6 x5)  
INT  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
POW  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
DEX  70  (4D6 x5)  
HP: 10  

Average Damage Bonus: none. Average Build: 0 Average Magic Points: 13 Move: 7 / 13 flying 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 2 
Fighting attacks: Fungi from Yuggoth may attack in hand-to-hand combat with its two crab-like claws. 
Seize (mnvr): Alternatively, they may try to seize the victim (of their build or smaller) and then fly into the sky to drop the victim from a height or take the victim so high that his or her lungs burst. 
Fighting 45% (22/9), 1D6 + damage bonus 
Seize (mnvr) can carry away beings of equal Build or smaller (pin­cers, grab, fly) 
Dodge 35% (17/7) 
Armor: None, however their resonating extra-terrene body causes all piercing weapons (bullets included) to do the minimum damage. 
Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a mi-go. 
Nightgaunts 
Shocking and uncouth black things with smooth, oily, whale-like surfaces, unpleasant horns that curved inward toward each other, bat wings whose beating made no sound, 
needlessly and disquietingly. 
Nightgaunt 
 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a night­
—H.P. Lovecraft 

lands that serve Nodens by, 
intruders, 
to die. Nightgaunts are stationed at various spots in the lonely parts of the Dreamlands, coming out at night to seek their prey. 
In primeval times they dwelled in the Waking World as well, and some suggest that may still be the case. Whilst not very intelligent, nightgaunts can understand some lan­guages (such as the gibberings of ghouls) and are friendly to some occult races. 
NIGHTGAUNTS, The faceless ones 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  50  (3D6 x5)  
CON  50  (3D6 x5)  
SIZ  70  (4D6 x5)  
INT  20  (1D6 x5)  
POW  50  (3D6 x5)  
DEX  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
HP: 12  

Average Damage Bonus: +0 Average Build: 0 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 6 / 12 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: They attack with their paws, tail, horns or limbs. Seize (mnvr): Nightgaunts favor seizing their opponents after 
which they can tickle them with their barbed tail. Nightgaunts usually attack en masse, attempting to sneak up quietly on vic­tims, grasp their weapons and overpower them. Two or more nightgaunts may combine their attacks to get hold of a strong victim (potentially granting the outnumbered bonus die). 
Tickle: Nightgaunts may only tickle foes who have already been seized. A successful tickling attack is extremely unnerving, for the barb of their tail is razor-sharp and perilous even while its light application does no damage—the target becomes bewil­dered, humiliated and disoriented, suffering a penalty die on all rolls for 1D4 rounds or until the tickling stops. Nightgaunt tails can snake up through holes and openings, slice through thick clothes and find even the interstices of metal armor. 
Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D4 + damage bonus Seize (mnvr)  victim is held fast for Tickle or further attacks Tickle* 35% (17/7), immobilized 1D6 + 1 rounds (target must 
already be seized) 
a 
parody of a human skull. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Dreams in the Witch House 

Resembling ordinary rats and easily mistaken for them at a distance. However close-up, the head of a rat-thing is an evil caricature of a human head and their paws are like tiny human hands. All have extremely strong, sharp teeth. 
These unnatural creatures are possibly created by malign sorcery. Sometimes a faithful servant may be transformed into a rat-thing and thus continue to serve his or her mas­ter. It is said such abominations are wise in the lore of the Mythos and may be gifted as familiars to witches and sor­cerers beloved of the dark gods. Brown Jenkin, the familiar of Keziah Mason, the witch, was a rat-thing. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Rat-things have a 30% chance of knowing 1D3 spells; those who knew spells in life retain that knowledge as rat­things. If the rat-thing is a gift from an Outer God or some­such entity, it is likely to know many more spells. 
RAT-THINGS, malevolent mockers and scuttling spies 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  10  (1D3 x5)  
CON  35  (2D6 x5)  
SIZ05  (05)  
INT  50  (3D6 x5)  
POW  35  (2D6 x5)  
DEX  90  (4D6+4 x5)  
HP: 4  

Average Damage Bonus: -2 Average Build: –2 Average Magic Points: 7 Move: 9 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Rat-things attack by climbing the legs or clothes 
of human opponents or drop down from ceilings. Once an attack succeeds, the rat-thing clings and keeps on biting. Tear­ing away a rat-thing costs an additional 1D3 hit points to the unfortunate victim. 
Fighting 35% (17/7), damage 1D4 + damage bonus Dodge 45% (22/9) 

Rat-Thing 
Armor: None, but attacks to hit a running rat-thing are made with 
one penalty die. Skills: Dodge 45%, Stealth 75%, Listen 50%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a rat-thing; if the rat-thing 
was known to the observer in life, however, it costs 1/1D8 Sanity points to see it. 
Sand-Dwellers 
Then out of one of the caves came a Sand-Dweller—rough­skinned, large-eyed, large-eared, with a horrible, distorted resemblance to the koala bear facially, though his body had 
an appearance of emaciation. He shambled toward me, manifestly eager. —H.P. Lovecraft and August Derleth, The Gable Window 
This obscure race look as though they are encrusted with sand. They dwell in caverns deep in desert areas and come out at night to prowl and hunt for prey. They are known to live in the American South West and may live in other deserts of the world as well. They are known to serve the Great Old Ones. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Sand-dwellers have a 30% chance of knowing 1D6 spells. 
Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: In combat, sand-dwellers have the usual Sand-Dweller 
STR 50 (3D6 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 80 (3D6+6 x5) INT 50 (3D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 65 (2D6+6 x5) HP: 14 Average Damage Bonus: +1D4 Average Build: 1 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 8 
SAND-DWELLERS, Stalkers of the wastes 

char. averages rolls 
ATTACKS 
range of unarmed attacks open to humanoids, in addition to its claws. 

Fighting 30% (15/6), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 30% (15/6) Armor: 3-point rough hide. Skills: Stealth 55%, Listen 60%, Spot Hidden 50%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a sand-dweller. 
Serpent People 
They walked lithely and sinuously erect on pre-mammalian members, their pied and hairless bodies bending with great suppleness. There was a loud hissing of formulae as they went to and fro. 
—Clark Ashton Smith, The Seven Geases. 

Serpent people resemble upright serpents with ophidian heads and scales, a tail and two arms and legs. A refined and cultured race, often dressed in robes. Yig is revered above all other gods of the serpent people, for he is the father of all snakes. In ancient times, some blasphemers chose instead to pray to Tsathoggua, however they were destroyed by a vengeful god millions of years ago—it is doubtful whether any such outcasts remain to peddle their ‘false’ litanies. 
The serpent people’s first kingdom (Valusia) flourished before even dinosaurs walked the Earth, some two hundred and seventy-five million years ago. They built black basalt cities and fought wars, all in the Permian era or before. They were then great sorcerers devoting much energy to calling forth dreadful demons and brewing potent poisons. With the coming of the dinosaurs two hundred and twenty-five million years ago, the first kingdom fell and serpent people retreated to strongholds far underground, the greatest of which was Yoth. In these times the serpent people became great scientists as well, able to manipulate life itself. 
In human prehistory the serpent people raised their second kingdom at the center of the Thurian continent. It fell even more rapidly than the first Valusia, overthrown this time by humans, who later claimed the land as their own. Again and again the serpent people retreated before the hu­man hordes until their last citadel of Yanyoga was destroyed in 10,000 B.C. 
A few lurking remnants of the race survive, as do pock­ets of dwarfed degenerates. These diminutions are likely to include an occasional atavistic, fully capable serpent person who is still favored by Yig. Degenerate serpent people are likely to have characteristics lessened by as much as a third. In addition there are certain hibernating serpent people— the sleepers—who have rested for thousands of years or more. On occasion these serpent people wake, to humanity’s regret. This third class of serpent people is typically more intelligent and powerful than their lurking brothers, often retaining the knowledge and ability to cast great sorcery. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Full serpent folk know at least 2D6 appropriate spells. A common spell among them is an illusion that transforms the caster’s appearance into that of a normal human, allow­ing the serpent person to mingle in human society (see ing or lurching. Their ever-changing shapes are a blas-Consume Likeness page @@). phemous contortion, making description somewhat 
difficult.
Note that degenerate forms are not likely to know Servitors accompany their masters as required, though magic. 
they are most commonly found in Azathoth’s court. Technology: Being great scientists, serpent people 
These are the demon flautists that play the flute-like may have access to, or the ability to construct 
music for their masters to dance by. The noise is useful technology—see Chapter 13: Artifacts 
best described as a sort of background dirge and Alien Devices. 
rising to a maddening cacophony of piping. 

They sometimes play for groups of SERPENT PEOPLE, Full atavism cultists as well, perhaps aiding in the char. averages rolls summoning of dark entities or gods. STR 50 (3D6 x5) Either way, the god or entity arrives 
CON 50 (3D6 x5) 
1D3+1 rounds after the servitor SIZ 50 (3D6 x5) 
announces it and departs when 

INT 80 (3D6+6 x5) 
dismissed by the servitor, or 2D6 

POW 65 (2D6+6 x5) 
rounds after the servitor’s death, or 

DEX 65 (2D6+6 x5) 
when the god pleases. Summoning 

HP: 10 costs the servitor a magic point, and 
Average Damage Bonus: none. Average Build: 0 another magic point for each five Average Magic Points: 13 rounds that the summoned being Move: 8 remains. 
ATTACKS SPECIAL POWERS Attacks per round: 1 
Music of Madness: The dis-

Fighting attacks: Serpent peo­
cordant music made by these 

ple have the usual range of unarmed attacks open 


to humanoids. They may use all weapons known to 
man, clutching them effectively in taloned hands. 
Bite: The bite of a serpent person is highly poisonous. The victim must succeed in an Extreme CON roll—if failed take 1D8 damage. 
Fighting 50% (25/10), damage 1D3 + damage bonus 
Bite 35% (17/7), damage 1D8 + poison (see above) 
Dodge 32% (16/6) 
Armor: 1-point scales. 
Skills: Intimidate 60%, Sciences: (Biology) 40%, (Chemistry) 40%, Spot Hidden 35%. 
Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a serpent person. 
Servitors of the Outer Gods 
Toad-like creatures which seemed constantly to be changing shape and appearance, and from whom emanated, by some means I could not distinguish, a ghastly ululation, a piping. 
— August Derleth, 
The Lurker at the Threshold 
Vaguely resembling frogs, as well as squids or octopi, these amorphous beings progress by rolling, slither­

creatures adversely affects human listeners, who must make a Sanity roll every two rounds they endure the music or lose 1D4 Sanity points. It is suggested by learned wizards that those who lose their mind through such music may themselves becomes servitors—warped in mind and body and forever doomed to dance to the tune of the Outer Gods. 
Spells: Each knows at least 1D10 spells, always including 1D10 Summon/Bind and Call spells. 
SERVITORS of the Outer Gods 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  70  (4D6 x5)  
CON  80  (3D6+6 x5)  
SIZ  100  (4D6+6 x5)  
INT  85  (5D6 x5)  
POW  95  (2D6+12 x5)  
DEX  80  (3D6+6 x5)  
HP: 18  

Average Damage Bonus: +1D6 Average Build: 2 Average Magic Points: 19 Move: 7 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 4 Fighting attacks: A mass of writhing tentacles batter and twist at 
the target. Following a successful hit, roll 1D3 determine how many tentacles cause damage. Its tentacles may be used to seize an opponent with a successful mnvr. The range of its tentacles equals one-fifth of the monster’s SIZ in yards. 
Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 + damage bonus per tentacle Dodge 41% (20/8) Armor: None, but no physical weapon can harm one; spells and 

magical weapons do normal damage; regenerates 3 hit points 
per round until dead. Sanity Loss: 1/1D10 Sanity points to see a servitor. 
Shaggai, Insects from 
Even though they flew so fast I could, with the augmented 
perception of terror, make out many more details than I 
wished. Those huge lidless eyes which stared in hate at me, 
the jointed tendrils which seemed to twist from the head 
in cosmic rhythms, the ten legs, covered with black shining 
tentacles and folded into the pallid underbelly, and the 
semi-circular ridged wings covered with triangular scales— 
all this cannot convey the soul-ripping horror of the shape which darted at me. I saw the three mouths of the thing move moistly, and then it was upon me. —Ramsey Campbell, The Insects from Shaggai 
These para-dimensional insect-beings never feed (if they do it is by some strange method such as photosynthesis), and they spend their time in decadence, in aesthetic enjoyment of abnormality coupled with a lust for causing pain upon others (usually through the torture of their many slave races). 
Shans, as they are also known, are extremely long-lived, taking centuries to reach adulthood. As a race, they are scientifically advanced, having access to many weapons and devices that operate by focused mind-power (magic points). The shan worship Azathoth with many complex rites and systems of torment. 
Shans are now a fugitive race. Shaggai itself was de­stroyed by a great catastrophe, however many shan escaped in temples made of an indestructible grey metal, teleporting them to other worlds, including Earth. However, Earth’s atmosphere contains certain a component that prevented the shan from teleporting away once they arrived here. This unknown component also stops individual shan from flying any great distance. 
Trapped, the insect-beings now dwelling on Earth have brought slave beings from the planet Xiclotl as guards. Over the centuries the shan have manipulated and possessed small numbers of humans to advance their alien agenda. At one time they ruled a human witch-cult dedicated to finding sacrifices for Azathoth, whilst in more modern time it is suggested that they have begun to infiltrate pockets of political power.  The largest colony of shan is rumored to exist near Goatswood, a village of England’s Severn Valley. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Mental Attack: Shans are parasitic and not wholly materi­al. One of these bird-sized creatures can fly right through human tissue into a target’s brain, wherein it crawls about and reads its host’s memories, affects thought processes and injects specific memories and ideas of its own. During the day, the insect is not active within the brain, leaving the victim to do more or less as he or she pleases. However at 
Insect from Shaggai 

night the shan wakes and begins to implant memories— effectively pre-programming the host to do its bidding. It can implant sanity-destroying sights, which the insect has witnessed, or riddle memory-fragments to entice the victim into performing certain actions. Eventually the host is so hypnotized that he or she gladly (knowingly or unknow­ingly) helps the shan. Often such progressively increasing control causes the victim to go raving mad and thus become an unsuitable host. 
Spells: Shan have an 80% chance of knowing 2D10 spells, usually including Call Azathoth. 
INSECTS FROM SHAGGAI, Mental parasites 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  10  (1D3 x5)  
CON  10  (1D3 x5)  
SIZ  05  (05)  
INT  80  (3D6+6 x5)  
POW  85  (5D6 x5)  
DEX  80  (2D6+24 x5)  
HP: 1  

Average Damage Bonus: N/A Average Build: -2 Average Magic Points: 19 Move: 4/20 flying 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 1 
Fighting attacks: An insect from Shaggai relies on either its nerve­whip or on its ability to possess the target (meld) and has no innate Fighting skill otherwise. 
Nerve Whip: The nerve whip is a small technical device that proj­ects a chattering line of pallid light. When the light strikes a target, make an opposed POW roll. If the shan wins, the target is overcome by agony and can do nothing but writhe on the ground until the weapon is turned off. If the attack fails, the target is still in pain and all rolls are made with one penalty die for a number of hours equal to 24 minus one-fifth of the victim’s CON. The attack may be renewed each round and the penalties are cumulative. 
Meld: This represents the shan’s chance to fly in to a human’s head and stay there. 
Nerve Whip 50% (25/10), damage special 
Meld 60% (30/12), no damage, however the insect gains progres­
sive control after it enters the brain of target 

Dodge 77% (38/15) 
Armor: None. 
Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a shan. 

Shantak 

Shantaks 
Not any birds or bats known elsewhere on earth…for they were larger than elephants and had heads like a horse’s…The Shantak-bird has scales instead of feathers and those scales are very slippery. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath 
Shantaks brood in cavernous holes and their wings are encrusted with rime and nitre. They are always described as noisome and loathly, and are often used as steeds by the servants of the Outer Gods. They have an extreme fear of nightgaunts and always retreat from them. 
Shantaks can fly through space and have been known to carry an unwary rider straight to the throne of Azathoth. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: None. 
SHANTAKS, Winged elephantine mounts 
char. averages rolls 
STR 170 (4D6+20 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 250 (4D6+36 x5) INT 15 (1D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 50 (2D6+3 x5) HP: 31 Average Damage Bonus: +4D6 Average Build: 5 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 6/18 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: These great monsters may strike with limbs or 
bite at an opponent. Bite and hold (mnvr): Use a bite attack to grab hold of their prey. Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Bite and hold (mnvr) damage 2D6 + 2 + held for 1D6 damage per 
round Dodge 25% (12/5) Armor: 9-point hide. 
Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see a shantak. 

Shoggoths 
The nightmare, plastic column of fetid, black iridescence oozed 
tightly onward…A shapeless congerie of protoplasmic bubbles, 
faintly self-luminous, and with myriads of temporary eyes 
forming and unforming as pustules of greenish light all over 
the tunnel-filling front that bore down upon us, crushing the 
frantic penguins and slithering over the glistening floor that it 
and its kind had swept so evilly free of all litter. Still came that 
eldritch mocking cry—”Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!” 
—H.P. Lovecraft, At the Mountains of Madness 

Shoggoths are among the most horrible and loathsome of Mythos monsters. Mighty sacks of protoplasm, roughly 15­feet in diameter, these amphibious creatures are able to form limbs, eyes and other appendages at will, imitate other life forms and perform great feats of strength. They communi­cate in whatever manner their master race wishes, forming special organs for the purpose. 
Despite Abdul Alhazred's claims that there were none on Earth itself, save in the crazed nightmares of dreamers, shoggoths do exist in deep and dark places. Often found as servants of deep ones and other races, they are surly at best, ever becoming more intelligent, more rebellious and more imitative. Their creators, the ancient elder things, found to their cost the true nature of their servants in a rebellion that virtually destroyed their civilization. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: None—however, certain individuals of great age may possess the knowledge and ability to case spells. 
SHOGGOTHS, Fetid iridescences 
char. averages rolls 
STR 315 (18D6 x5) CON 210 (12D6 x5) SIZ 420 (24D6 x5) INT 35 (2D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 15 (1D6 x5) Hit Points: 63 Average Damage Bonus: 8D6 Average Build: 9 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 10 rolling 

Attacks per round: 2 
Fighting attacks: In combat, a shoggoth covers an area 5 yards square and is able to produce tentacles, claws or any manner of appendages at will with which to perform a crushing attack. Those unfortunate enough to be hit by a shoggoth attack may also be engulfed. 
Engulf: Each person engulfed within the shoggoth is attacked sep­arately and each must make a successful opposed STR roll or be sucked apart. If the shoggoth attacks more than one target, it must divide its STR among all targets. 
Those held within the shoggoth’s black bulk can strike back only on rounds in which they successfully roll STR or less on 1D100. Each round a victim is held within a shoggoth, he or she loses hit points equal to the shoggoth’s damage bonus; the damage describable as rupturing, crushing and being sucked into piec­es. A shoggoth can engulf any number of enemies; however they may not exceed a total SIZ greater than its own SIZ. 
Fighting 70% (35/14), damage equals damage bonus or it can 
choose to engulf the target (see above) 
Dodge: 8% (4/1) 
Armor: None, but (1) fire and electrical attacks do only half dam­age; (2) physical weapons such as firearms and knives do only 1 point of damage per hit; (3) a shoggoth regenerates 2 hit points per round. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6/1D20 Sanity points to see a shoggoth. 

Shoggoth Lord 
You cannot imagine the Shoggoth Lord’s mastery of shapes! His race has bred smaller since modern man last met with it. Oh, but the Shoggoth Lords are limber now! Supremest polymorph— though what they are beneath all else, is Horror itself. 
—Michael Shea, Fat Face 

Shoggoth Lords are smaller, more intelligent descendants of their larger monstrous cousins. Through some quirk of evolution, or perhaps through the unwitting intervention of some other species or being, a handful of shoggoths have evolved into intelligent creatures able at will to mimic hu­mans in appearance and speech. 
These beings, without exception, appear in human form as grossly obese, hairless figures. They are cunning and charming, and somewhat awkward in their interactions with humans. Although a shoggoth lord may freely trans­mute between its human and monstrous forms it takes great concentration and control to remain in human form for any length of time. If somehow caught off guard, angered, or distracted, a shoggoth lord quickly melts down into its ter­rible true gelatinous self. These creatures guard their secrets and identities well, living and feeding alone in private and quickly dispatching nosey investigators who would unmask them and expose their true horror. 
Shoggoth lords find it amusing (and nourishing) to penetrate the human world; only in human beings do they find delightful horror of comprehension that makes a thing really worth eating. Shoggoth lords care only about satisfying themselves. Though more sophisticated than most predators, they are given to the same grandiose claims of territory and to murderous squabbles among themselves. They are not social, they do not die natural deaths, nor do they breed. 
Because of the great control required to sustain their human guises, certain characteristics in their human form are lower than when in their natural state. SPECIAL POWERS Spells: Knows 1D3 spells as the Keeper desires. 
SHOGGOTH LORD, Corpulent monstrosities 
Human Form 
char. averages rolls 
STR 75 (2D6+8 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 65 (3D6+3 x5) INT 65 (2D6+6 x5) POW 65 (3D6+3 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) APP 30 (1D6+3 x5) EDU 50 (3D6 x5) 
Shoggoth Form 
char. averages rolls 
STR 120 (4D6+10 x5) 
CON 155 (6D6+10 x5) 
SIZ 65 (3D6+3 x5) 
INT 65 (2D6+6 x5) 
POW 65 (3D6+3 x5) 
DEX 50 (3D6 x5) 
HP: 13 (human form) / 22 (shoggoth form) 
Average Damage Bonus: 1D4 (human form) / 1D6 (shoggoth form) 
Average Build: 1 (human form) / 2 (shoggoth form) 
Average Magic Points: 13 
Move: 8 walking /10 rolling 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 2 
Fighting attacks: A shoggoth lord will attempt to engulf its living prey into its bubbling gelatinous body. When it takes prey, it seizes and holds its victim as it begins to suck it into its body mass, where it can be digested. Whilst being digested, the vic­tim suffers 1D6 hit points damage each round from the caustic acids and digestive fluids breaking down the unfortunate’s body. 
Those so held may attempt to break free each round by an opposed STR roll. Unlike their larger cousins, shoggoth lords may only feed on one victim at a time. While feeding, the shoggoth lord may not use its crush attack, although it can still lash out with its powerful pseudopod fists. 
Fighting 90% (45/18), damage 1D6+2 + damage bonus appro­priate to its present form or engulf a target, damage 1D6 per round (acid damage) until victim is dead 
Dodge 26% (13/5) 
Armor: None, but (1) fire and electrical attacks do only half dam­age; (2) physical weapons such as firearms and knives do only 1 point of damage per hit; (3) a shoggoth regenerates 2 hit points per round. 
Skills: Charm 70%, Intimidate 60%, Persuade 60%, Stealth 65%, more as the Keeper desires. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6/1D20 Sanity points to see a shoggoth lord in its true form. Keepers may add 1/1D3 Sanity point loss for those investigators witnessing a shoggoth lord change from human to shoggoth form. 
Star-Spawn of Cthulhu 
They all lay in stone houses in their great city of R’lyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth might once more be ready… —H.P. Lovecraft, The Call of Cthulhu 
These gigantic octopoid beings resemble Cthulhu himself, however are smaller in stature. Not all the inhabitants of R’ly­eh were trapped in its watery angles when it sank. Some still live on in the deep trenches beneath the ocean, where they are tended by the deep ones. Related entities also dwell in the stars, such as the beings said to infest the Lake of Hali on a planet near the star Aldebaran, in Taurus. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: Each knows 3D6 spells. 
STAR-SPAWN OF CTHULHU, Satraps of the sleeper 
char. averages rolls 
STR 350 (2D6 x50) CON 260 (3D6 x25) SIZ 525 (3D6 x50) INT 105 (6D6 x5) POW 105 (6D6 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) HP: 78 Average Damage Bonus: +10D6 Average Build: 11 Average Magic Points: 21 Move: 15 / 15 Swim 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 4 Fighting attacks: A star-spawn may attack with tentacles or with 
claws to cause damage or to seize people. Fighting 80% (40/16), damage equals damage bonus Dodge 26% (13/5) 
Armor: 10-point hide and blubber; regenerates 3 hit points per round. Sanity Loss: 1D6/1D20 Sanity points to see a star-spawn. 
Star Vampires 
The dim outlines of a presence came into view; the blood­filled outlines of that unseen shambler from the stars. It was red and dripping; an immensity of pulsing, moving jelly; a scarlet blob with myriad tentacular trunks that waved and wavered. There were suckers on the tips of the appendages, and these were opening and closing with ghoulish lust…The thing was bloated and obscene; a headless, faceless, eyeless bulk with the ravenous maw and titanic talons of a star-born 
monster. The human blood on which it had fed revealed the hitherto invisible out-lines of the feaster. —Robert Bloch, The Shambler from the Stars 
These loathsome things are nor­mally invisible, their presence signaled only by a sort of ghoulish 
tittering sound. After feeding, they become visible through the blood they drink. 
Summoned from the depths of space, some can be controlled to serve powerful wizards or other 
beings. 
Star Spawn 
seen, attacks can be made at equivalent. While it can be while the fresh blood me­tabolizes into a transparent visible for six rounds, 

star vampire remains —August Derleth and Mark Schorer, The Lair of the After feeding, the 
a star vampire suffer no more than four feet, with singularly small eyes set deep a penalty die to hit, in dome-like, hairless heads. These…attackers fell upon the even if it is tittering. party and had killed men and animals with their bright 
attempting to attack 
Invisible: Those SPECIAL POWERS 


Tcho-Tchos 
Our attackers…were a horde of little men, the tallest of them 
swords almost before our men could extract their weapons. 
Star-Spawn 

The blasted Plateau of Tsang in Tibet is claimed to be one 
of the incursions of dread Leng into our space-time. On it 
Star Vampire and in a few other far-removed regions dwell the tribes of a normal chance to hit. 
Spells: Star vampires have a 30% chance of knowing 1D3 spells. 
STAR VAMPIRES, Invisible raveners 
char. averages rolls 
STR 130 (2D6 x50) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 130 (4D6+12 x5) INT 50 (3D6 x5) POW 75 (1D6+12 x5) DEX 40 (1D6+6 x5) HP: 19 Average Damage Bonus: +2D6 Average Build: 3 Average Magic Points:15 Move: 6 / 9 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 3 Fighting attacks: It can use its talons to attack. Talon Seize (mnvr): Once a victim is seized, on the following 
round, the star vampire will use its bite attack to drain the victim of blood 
Bite: Can only be used on a seized victim, whether alive or dead, with living victims losing 3D10 STR per round, as blood loss. If not killed, the victim replaces this loss quickly, in three days or less. 
Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Seize (mnvr) No damage, seize target. Seized targets can be bitten on following round Bite Automatic success if seized, damage 3D10 STR blood drain per round Dodge 23% (11/4) Armor: 4-point hide. Bullets do only half damage to the extra-ter­rene integument of the star vampire. Sanity Loss: 1/1D10 Sanity points to see a star vampire or experi­ence its attack. 


the Tcho-Tchos. In the beginnings of time, Chaugnar Faugn made a race of beings, the Miri Nigri, to serve him. The Miri were a race of dwarfs fashioned from the flesh of primitive amphibians. The Tcho-Tchos are said to come from humans who intermingled with the horrible Miri, forming a hybrid race of evil intent. Descendants are outwardly human-like, and of various sizes and costume, however the taint of the Miri curses all Tcho-Tchos with Half-normal sanity at birth. The remaining sanity of the Tcho-Tchos is rapidly eroded in a few years by participation in unspeakable ceremonies and horrific deeds, whilst a desire for inflicting cruelty and torture upon others becomes second nature. 
Differing Tcho-Tcho tribes worship a variety of Great Old Ones, not just Chaugnar Faugn. 
SPECIAL POWERS 
Spells: A Tcho-Tcho priest or acolyte knows at least three spells, usually including a Contact Deity spell and the Voor­ish Sign. 
TCHO-TCHO, Cruel, savage worshippers of the dark gods 
char. averages rolls 
STR 50 (3D6 x5) CON 50 (3D6 x5) SIZ 45 (2D6+2 x5) INT 50 (3D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) Note: Halve SAN for children and reduce Sanity 

points to 0 in adults. HP: 9 Average Damage Bonus: none. Average Build: 0 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 8 

ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Tcho-Tchos have the usual 
range of unarmed attacks open to human­oids and can use any human weapons. Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D3 + damage 
Tcho-Tcho 

bonus or by weapon type Dodge 26% (13/5) Armor: None. Skills: Intimidate 40%, Stealth 60%, Swim, 45%, Track 50%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D3 to see these degenerate creatures. 
Section Two: Deities of the Mythos 
The Old Ones were, the Old Ones are, and the Old Ones shall be. Not in the spaces we know, but ‘between’ them, They walk serene and primal, undimensioned and to us unseen. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Dunwich Horror 

Although many of the alien races of the Cthulhu Mythos are terrifying, they are nothing before the might of the Mythos gods—immense creatures barely within our scope of under­standing, all the more horrifying for the fact that they do not care about the fate of humanity. 
It should also be noted that many deities have avatars. These are specific forms, sometimes with specific attributes, in which a portion of a god may appear. Cults often worship avatars of gods rather than the gods themselves. Nyarlatho­tep is particularly well known for his thousand avatars (or masks). 
The term deity is used here to mean not only gods but those with godlike powers, such as Great Cthulhu himself. Whilst Cthulhu is worshipped like a god, many believe him to be part of an alien race, though whether his brethren are like him or are lesser beings is not made clear. Those such as Great Cthulhu may be termed Great Old Ones to distin­guish them from actual gods as we generally understand the term. Some have tried to define a pantheon of Mythos gods or to classify them in to a hierarchy such as elder gods, other gods, outer gods, great old ones and so on. In his writings, Lovecraft was inconsistent in his use of these entities, just as real world myths have inconsistencies and contradictions. As Keeper you should feel empowered to make your own decisions about what fits your story, and which gods you wish to use and how. These matters are meant to be beyond man’s understanding, so to define them too closely may prove counterproductive. 
Each deity has characteristic values listed, though these are often so large when compared with those of an investi­gator that they may cease to have any useful relevance. They are included only to give a sense of scale and completeness. As with monsters, these values may be raised or lowered according to the scenario and the Keeper’s requirements. 
Remember that a roll is not permitted if an opposing characteristic exceeds that of an investigator by 100 or more; this will often be the case with deities. 
Note, though, that these deities are not omnipotent and that many can be physically assaulted and driven back (if not killed), as happens to Great Cthulhu in the story The Call of Cthulhu. 
Dodge skill: When would a god need to dodge an inves­tigator? The Dodge skill has been omitted from gods. 
Outnumbered bonus: This is never granted when in combat with a deity. 
When Facing a God 
A god is going to regard an investigator as a human might regard an insect. Do you know the name of a particular ant that lives in your garden? Does an ant have the intellect or power to affect you? You might flick an insect away if it lands on you, but would you hunt it down? 
When humans are in the presence of a god it is unlikely that the god will even notice them. Perhaps it would tread on them as we might tread on an ant. 
Abhoth 
He descried…in the pool a grayish, horrid mass that nearly choked it from rim to rim. Here, it seemed, was the ultimate source of all miscreation and abomination. For the gray mass quobbed and quivered, and swelled perpetually; and from it, in manifold fission, were spawned the anatomies that crept away on every side through the grotto. 
—Clark Ashton Smith, The Seven Geases 

Manifestly not native to this planet, Abhoth’s protean form and cynical mind imply relation to Tsathoggua. The black caverns wherein it dwells and which it never leaves may well be part of N’Kai, an underground world beneath North America. Some reports place these caverns directly beneath the New England village of Dunwich. 
Cult 

Abhoth has no known human worshipers. Underground horrors or Abhoth’s own spawn may worship it. 
Other Characteristics 
Obscene monsters constantly form in the grey mass and crawl away from their parent. Abhoth’s tentacles and limbs grasp many offspring and devour them again, returning them to the primal mass, but more manage to escape. If someone nears Abhoth, the various monstrous spawn, which continually detach from its body, become more nu­merous and these may harry or attack investigators. 
Spawn of Abhoth are manifold and varied in appear­ance; particulars are best left to the Keeper. Its spawn are no larger than SIZ 5 to 90 (3D6 x 5), at least at first—after a year or so of feeding and growing, a spawn may be of any size. 
If a party is unfortunate enough to come upon Abhoth itself, bubbling uncleanly in its pool of filth, Abhoth will put forth a probing hand or member, which will feel over the intruders and then drop off and crawl away. The visitor will then either be seized and devoured by other appendages of Abhoth’s or ignored, at the Keeper’s option. Abhoth is known to speak telepathically with intruders, but few have returned from the meeting. 
ABHOTH, Source of Uncleanness 
STR 200 CON 500 SIZ 400 INT 65 POW 250 DEX 5 HP 90 Damage Bonus: +6D6, but only 1D6 per pseudopod Build: 7 Magic Points: 50 

Abhoth 
Move: 0 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Abhoth will wrestle and seize using his append­
ages. If successful, he seizes and absorbs his victim—whether the victim is digested slowly or assimilated telepathically is not known. 
Fighting: 60% (30/12), victim absorbed 
Armor: Abhoth regenerates from all kinetic damage at the rate of 20 points per combat round. Fire or magic will cause normal damage. If Abhoth is reduced to 0 hit points, it withdraws and sinks far away down into the earth where it is inaccessible to further damage. It oozes toward the surface after healing from its injuries. 
Spells: None, but it may give someone that it takes a fancy to a por­tion of its own body, which could be used to create a creature identical to the spawn of Abhoth. 
Sanity Loss: seeing Abhoth costs 1D3/1D20 Sanity points. 
Atlach-Nacha 
A darksome form, big as a crouching man but with long spider-like members…He saw that there was a kind of face on the squat ebon body, low down amid the several-jointed legs. The face peered up with a weird expression of doubt and inquiry; and terror crawled through the veins of the bold huntsman as he met the small, crafty eyes that were circled about with hair. 
—Clark Ashton Smith, The Seven Geases 
Atlach-Nacha superficially resembles a huge and hideous black hairy spider with a strange, remotely human face and little red eyes rimmed with hair. It lives underground, eternally spinning a fantastic web, bridging an immeasur­ably deep chasm for unknown purposes. Old books cite the belief that when the web is completed, the end of the world will come. In the remote past Atlach-Nacha’s dwelling was far beneath the continent of Hyperborea— modern Green­land. Now it may dwell beneath South America. 
Cult 
Atlach-Nacha is superstitiously believed to rule all spiders, perhaps because of its body form. It has no cult among humans, however it sometimes grants sorcerers spells and POW. Sorcerers sometimes summon Atlach-Nacha via var­ious elder spells—a dangerous approach, however, for the 


spider-god hates leaving its eternal work of spinning. The children of Atlach-Nacha in the Dreamlands—called the Leng Spiders—are known to worship Atlach-Nacha. 
Other Characteristics 
Whoever stumbles into Atlach-Nacha’s web becomes trapped. The web has STR150 against which any victim must roll to escape. In an hour or a day, Atlach-Nacha ap­pears to dispose of the captive. 
The spider god can first fling more strands over the victim and then bite, or it can bite at once. When it bites, it injects a paralyzing poison, leaving the victim incapable of action or defense. 
Atlach-Nacha then sucks the victim’s body juices at the rate of 3D10 STR per combat round. If uncared-for, the husk soon dies. If rescued, the victim’s STR returns at a rate of 2D10 points per game month of bed-rest. During this time the victim’s hit points can never exceed one-Extreme of his or her STR. 
ATLACH-NACHA, The Spider God 
STR 150 CON 375 SIZ 125 INT 75 POW 150 DEX 125 HP 50 Damage Bonus: +2D6 Build: 3 Magic Points: 30 Move: 15 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Atlach-Nacha may kick out with its many legs or 
bash with its bulky abdomen. 

Bite: A bite penetrates any mundane armor and injects paralyzing poison. The target must make an Extreme CON roll to resist for 1D10 rounds, after which the roll must be made again. If the second roll is also successful the poison has been resisted. If either roll is failed the target is paralyzed. 
Cast web: The target is entangled in a strong, sticky web. Breaking out requires an opposed STR roll versus the web’s STR 150. 
Fighting 60% (30/12), damage bonus or bite (see above) Cast web 80% (40/16), see above Armor: 12 points of chitin and fur.  If hit points reach zero, it flees 
across its complex web to a secret lair where it heals. Spells: All Contact spells. Sanity Loss: 1/1D10 Sanity points to see Atlach-Nacha. 
Atlach-Nacha 
Azathoth 
That last amorphous blight of nethermost confusion which blasphemes and bubbles at the center of all infinity—the boundless daemon sultan Azathoth, whose name no lips dare speak aloud, and who gnaws hungrily in inconceivable, unlighted chambers beyond time amidst the muffled, maddening beating of vile drums and the thin monotonous whine of accursed flutes. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath 
Azathoth is the ruler of the Gods, and has existed since the beginning of the universe. It dwells beyond normal space­time at the center of the universe, where its amorphous body writhes unceasingly to the monotonous piping of a flute. Lesser gods dance mindlessly round Azathoth to the same music. Azathoth is described as both blind and idiotic, a “monstrous nuclear chaos.” The urges of Azathoth are immediately fulfilled by Nyarlathotep. 
Cult 
Azathoth is little worshiped, for the god offers not even gratitude in return. Usually humans call upon Azathoth by accident, and thereby unwittingly bring disaster and horror. Only the criminally insane would knowingly worship such a being. Nonetheless, such worshipers may have special in­sights into the nature of the universe, its origin, powers, and meaning, insights perhaps understandable only by other madmen. 
Other Characteristics 
Azathoth always manifests with a servitor flautist to play its music, and 1D10–1 Lesser Other Gods. Summoners risk Azathoth striking out in irritation, the percentile chance equal to 100% minus ten percentiles for each Other God who arrived, and minus another five percentiles for each magic point that the sorcerer expends to placate the god. The magic points sacri­ficed must be renewed each round. 
If angered, Azathoth grows: on the first round that it attacks, it also burgeons out from its summoned confines, and its pseudopods have a reach of 50 yards. On the second combat round it has a reach of 100 yards, the third round giving it 200 yards, and so on, doubling each round indefinitely. 
There is also a chance that Azathoth voluntarily departs if it becomes angered, equal to ten percentiles per round minus one percentile per lesser other god that arrived with it. 
An area equal to its pseudopod radius is blasted by Azathoth and totally ruined, with cracked boulders, pools of alkaline water, and dead splintered trees, but damage to investigators is done by specific pseudopod. 
AZATHOTH, Seething nuclear chaos 
STR N/A CON 1500 SIZ varies INT 0 POW 500 DEX N/A HP 300 Damage Bonus: N/A Build: Varies Magic Points: 100 Move: 0 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1D6 Fighting attacks: Azathoth’s many pseudopods may strike any­
thing nearby. Fighting 100% (50/20), damage 1D100 hit points Armor: None, but at 0 hit points Azathoth is dispelled and not slain, and can return at full strength in 1D6 hours. It takes 3D6 damage from an Elder Sign, but destroys the Sign. Spells: Commands all the Lesser Other Gods and much of the universe; fortunately it has 0 INT. Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see Azathoth. 

Azathoth 
Bast 
Beauty—coolness—aloofness—philosophic repose—self-suf­ficiency—untamed mastery—where else can we find these things with even half the perfection and completeness that 
mark their incarnation in the peerless and softly gliding cat? —H.P. Lovecraft, Cats and Dogs 
Bast, the Cat Goddess, is represented as a cat or as a woman with a cat’s head. In ancient Egypt she was often shown with a sistrum in her right hand, an aegis surmounted with a lion’s head in her left hand, and a small bag slung over her left arm. She is also called Bastet or Ubasti. Bast may have dominion only over Earth and its dreamlands, for the cats of Saturn in the Dreamlands are inimical to Earth’s cats. 
Cult 
The goddess of ancient Bubastis, in Egypt, Bast’s cult eventually came to major Roman cities, including Pompeii. When she was actively worshiped, she was both a deity of the home and a lioness war goddess. Her worshipers always regarded her affectionately. Her cult seems not to have survived among humans, except in the Dreamlands, but she may not care. All cats worship her in their savage hearts. 
Other Characteristics 
Like the other gods, Bast rarely takes action. If a person is remarkably cruel to cats, she may act through her feline minions. If they cannot solve the difficulty she Bast may come personally. She always appears with an entourage of large, sleek felines—mostly house cats, but including at least one lioness, tigress, or other big cat. 
Bast commands all felines, anywhere in the world. She can summon any number of cats, but they must travel normally to her. 
She may heal damage to herself or to a cat by ex­pending one magic point per point of damage. 
BAST, Goddess of Cats 
STR 240 CON 125 SIZ 60 INT 175 POW 150 DEX 225 APP 99 HP 18 Damage Bonus: +3D6 Build: 4 Magic Points: 30 Move: 20 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 3 Fighting attacks: If Bast must participate in a fight, she can 
transform one or both of her delicate arms and hands into the tawny forelimbs of a lioness and swipe with them. Her attacks penetrate armor without diminishment of damage and the dripping wounds do not heal until treated by magic or by a successful First Aid or Medicine roll. As well as bite and claw 
she also has the usual range of unarmed attacks open to hu­

manoids. Fighting 100% (50/20), damage 1D8 + damage bonus. Armor: None, but note spells entry below. 
Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity loss to see Bast. 

Chaugnar Faugn 
The ears were webbed and tentacled, the trunk terminated in 
a huge flaring disk at least a foot in diameter…Its forelimbs 
were bent stiffly at the elbow, and its hands—it had human 
hands—rested palms upward on its lap. Its shoulders were 
broad and square and its breasts and enormous stomach 
sloped outward, cushioning the trunk. 
—Frank Belknap Long, The Horror from the Hills 

Chaugnar Faugn squats in a cave in mountainous Asia, guarded day and night by subhuman thralls only vaguely manlike, who hold rites so foul that none dare describe them. Usually Chaugnar Faugn remains immobile on his pedestal, a grotesque statue. Legends say that one day the “White Aco­lyte” will come to bear Chaugnar Faugn to a new land. 
Cult 
Chaugnar Faugn is primarily worshiped by the subhu­
man tcho-tcho people of the Tsang Plateau. In addition 

he has scattered cults among the humans of central Asia. Some of these have begun to spread, such as The Blood, which migrated to Montreal, Canada in the 18th century. 
Other Characteristics 
At night, Chaugnar Faugn may stir and hungrily feed on a sacrifice, or upon anyone at hand. Day or night, he may lurch from his pedestal to annihilate unbelievers who enter his precincts. The disk-like snout at the end of his trunk is an organ that drains blood from a victim. Laid on an open wound, that wound never heals. 
If not hungry, he may merely maul a victim for 1D6 hit points damage. 
He may choose a human as a companion, and thereafter that mesmerized person loses 1D10 Sanity points daily until mad. At night Chaugnar Faugn lays his snout-disk on his companion, incidentally inducing the captive’s nose and ears gradually to grow into caricatures of Chaugnar Faugn’s. Psychically linked to the companion, Chaugnar Faugn controls his or her will. If no other victim is handy, the elephantine god suckles from the companion, who loses 5 CON each time. 
Psychic Sending: the target dreams of Chaugnar Faugn and his greatness. If of a sensitive nature, the target may become obsessed by these dreams. 
CHAUGNAR FAUGN, Horror from the Hills 
STR 325 CON 700 SIZ 200 INT 125 POW 175 DEX 150 HP 90 Damage Bonus: +6D6 Build: 7 Magic Points: 35 Move: 20 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: Chaugnar Faugn may attack a target in many ways. He has hands and feet and a trunk with which to punch, push, grasp and kick. Bite and hold (mnvr): Once bitten the target is held and drained of 1D6 hit points per round. Heart Attack: To ward off this attack, targets must roll under their CON; with success the target loses only 1D6 hit points and falls unconscious. With a roll of less than or equal to one-fifth of CON the target suffers no ill effects. Mesmerize sacrifice: Causes target to go to Chaugnar Faugn to await destruction; however, the target may break the trance by 
making an Extreme POW roll. Fighting 80% (40/18), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Bite and hold (mnvr) drain 1D6 hit points each round Heart Attack Target must make CON roll, see above Mesmerize Target must make an Extreme POW roll, see above 
Armor: No ordinary weapon or mechanical device does damage; defends against enchanted impaling weapons with 10 points of super-dense hide; resists even the most powerful forces for 15 minutes before becoming disincarnate. If Chaugnar Faugn los­es more than 90 hit points, he becomes inert and lifeless. Depending on the alignment of the stars, he requires 
months, decades, or centuries of rituals and sacrifices to be restored to life.
 Contact Chaugnar  Curse of Chaugnar Faugn, Summon/Bind Broth­er of Chaugnar Faugn, others 
as the Keeper desires. Sanity Loss: Inert, he costs 0/1D6 Sanity points to 
 animated and active, he costs 1D4/2D6+1 Sanity points; seeing Chaugnar Faugn’s mutated companion costs 1/1D6 



Cthugha 
But even though we had shielded our eyes, it was impossible not to see the great amorphous shapes streaming skyward from this accursed place, nor the equally great being hovering like a cloud of living fire above the trees. 
—August Derleth, The Dweller in Darkness 

Cthugha resembles an enormous burning mass, continually varying in shape. It dwells at or near the star Fomalhaut, whence it may be called. It is one of the most obscure and remote of all the Great Old Ones. 
Cult 

No cult appears to be connected with Cthugha, though scattered fire cults to it have existed in the past, such as the church of Melkarth in ancient Rome. It is served by entities known as fire vampires. In some books, the fire vampires are stated to be ruled by a being known as Fthagghua; perhaps this is just another way to spell Cthugha. 
Other Characteristics 
Cthugha has the telepathic abilities common to the deities, but does not seem to communicate with humans in any fashion and must be summoned to be dealt with. 
CTHUGHA, The Living Flame 
STR 400 CON 600 SIZ 700 INT 140 POW 210 DEX 105 HP 130 Damage Bonus: +13D6 Build: 14 Magic Points: 42 Move: 0 (aerial drift) 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 3 Fighting attacks: Each round, Cthugha can form pseudopods 
from its formless mass with which to flail or squeeze individual targets. 
Automatic Scorch: Summoned, Cthugha brings 1D100 x10 flame vampires with it, which immediately begin to set the area alight. Cthugha itself floats above, scorching and burning the entire site. Humans in the area lose hit points to the heat, start­ing in the round after Cthugha comes. Each round the players must attempt to roll CON. Upon failure, the investigator loses 1 hit point per round until death. The only way to survive is to flee the area—a roughly circular area with a diameter of 2D10 x 20 yards. Cthugha does not depart until that area has been thoroughly blasted and burned, unless first dismissed by means of a spell. 
Flame Burst: Cthugha may belch forth fire instead of using pseudopods. A flame bust has a range of 150 yards and blankets the target site with fire, incinerating an area 20 yards across. Investigators within the area must attempt an Extreme CON roll (rolling equal to or below one-fifth of their CON): a failed roll indicates incineration. A success indicates 1D10 hit point loss. Body armor is of no help against this attack, but an intervening wall or embankment would be. 
Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D6 + half dam­age bonus Flame Burst Targets must make an Extreme CON roll, special (see above) Armor: 14 points of armor. Weapons that come in 
to contact with Cthugha are destroyed. Spells: All spells concerning entities of flame and itself. Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D20 Sanity points to see Cthugha. 



Great Cthulhu 
A monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of 
feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing…was of a somewhat bloated corpulence…It lumbered slobberingly 
into sight and gropingly squeezed its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway…A mountain walked or stumbled. 
— H.P. Lovecraft, The Call of Cthulhu 
Great Cthulhu’s body form is not fixed. He can warp and modify it at will, extending new limbs, retracting old ones, greatly increasing his wings’ area and reducing his body’s size to enable flight, or elongating a single limb or tenta­cle to enable it to writhe through yards of corridor. However, his overall shape is tied to the form described. Thus he might expand or contract his wings, but would never completely ab­sorb them. All of his forms are recognizable as caricatures of Cthulhu. 


Cthulhu dwells in the corpse city of black R’lyeh, sunken deep beneath the surface of the Pacific. He is in a living death 
while there, but someday the city will rise and he will wake, freed to raven and slay across the world. In the city are also entombed other members of Cthulhu’s race. Cthulhu is evidently the high priest and ruler of them all, and is by far the most potent. 
Cult 
Cthulhu’s cult is the most widespread and popular cult of the earthly Great Old Ones. This cult believes that Cthulhu plunged from the stars with his kin and built a great prehistoric city at R’lyeh, ruling the world. 

When the stars changed, their continent sank beneath the sea, and the city and its inhabitants fell into a death-sleep where they await their reawakening by members of Cthul­hu’s cult. When R’lyeh rises above the waves, members of the cult will be required to come to it and open the vast black door behind which Cthulhu dreams, whereupon he will awaken and rise to revel across the world in wild aban­don with the faithful. 
Entire tribes are recorded as worshiping Cthulhu. Re­mote Inuits are mentioned. So are degenerate Louisiana swamp-folk. He seems to be most worshiped among sea­folk, or beings that live near the sea. He is served by the beings known as the deep ones as well as by the octopoid things known as the star-spawn of Cthulhu. Cthulhu’s cult is prehistoric and of many variants, and Cthulhu himself has many names, most of which can be traced back to t h e i r 

The Call of Cthulhu 

In the sunken abysmal city of R’lyeh Cthulhu dreams and such dreams may affect the dreams of men. Cer­tain sensitive humans have, over the centuries, heard this dream call. Often artistic sensibilities are affected, causing the recipient to awake from slumber and be driven to produce nightmarish canvases or sculptures; finding no rest until their corrupted works of art have been completed. Others, finding no vent for their emotions and dream insights follow a darker path to absolute madness and suicide. 
Some cultists believe the recipients of Cthulhu’s call are honored and should be held in high regard, for they may well speak the echoes of Great Cthulhu’s thoughts. Whether there is intelligence behind such dream sending or just the emanations of psychic residue infecting the sensitive mind is unknown. Either way, the results tend to the same: the human’s mind is opened to awesome vistas of inhuman experience whilst at the same time comprehending the unspeak­able and implacable intent of dreaming Cthulhu. 
The first time a person receives the dreams of Cthulhu they must make a Sanity roll (1/1D4) and each night thereafter. The Keeper should determine the length of time over which such dream sending occurs (usually 1D20 days). As to outward affect upon the character concerned, it is left to the player and Keeper to best decide dependent upon that character’s tem­perament and artistic skills. 

original form. Thus two of his names are Tulu and Thu Thu. 
Other Characteristics 
Though in millennial sleep, Cthulhu is known to send hor­rifying dreams to mortal men, which may have tipped some people into madness. 
GREAT CTHULHU, Master of R’lyeh 
STR 700 CON 550 SIZ 1050 INT 210 POW 210 DEX 105 HP 160 Damage Bonus: +21D6 Build: 22 Magic Points: 42 Move: 16 Stride / 14 Swim / 12 Fly 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 2 
Fighting attacks: Cthulhu is huge and will stomp, kick and crush with his feet, clawed hands and tentacles. 
Scoop (mnvr): Each round 1D3 investigators are scooped up in Cthulhu’s flabby claws to die hideously. If Cthulhu were just emerging from a vast hole or if he were to stoop over, the in­vestigators might also be attacked by Cthulhu’s facial tentacles, which can grab four people per round and which can penetrate small openings. 
Fighting 100% (50/20), damage 1D6 + 21D6 damage bonus 
Scoop (mnvr) 1D3 investigators killed 
Armor: 21 points of trans-dimensional muck and muscle; addi­tionally, he regenerates 6 hit points per round. At 0 hit points, Cthulhu bursts and dissolves into a disgusting, cloying greenish cloud, then immediately begins to reform. He needs 1D10+10 minutes to regain full solidity and, when he does, he then has a full 160 hit points again. 
Spells: Knows hundreds of spells, but not Summon/Bind Night­gaunt and Contact Nodens; he might impart Contact Deep Ones or Contact Cthulhu via terrifying dreams. 
Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see Cthulhu. 

Cyaegha 
They saw that it was a gigantic eye staring down at them. Around the eye, the sky split; deep clefts opened through which darkness began to ooze, a darkness blacker than the night, which crawled down as a set of slimy tentacles, taking on more form, more definite shape…something was standing, outlined against the black sky, something which had tentacles of darkness and a green-glowing eye. 
—Eddy C. Bertin, Darkness, My Name Is 

Cyaegha is an enormous black mass with one huge spherical green eye. It is possible that Cyaegha’s form is simply that of the huge eye surrounded by long tentacles. 
Cult 

Cyaegha is worshiped by the residents of a small village over its resting place in a remote part of western Germany. The cult holds human sacrifice; however Cyaegha cares little for worship, only for the day of its release. Other, rural cults may exist elsewhere in Northern Europe. 
CYAEGHA, The One in Darkness 
STR 400 CON 600 SIZ 1000 INT 100 POW 175 DEX 70 HP 160 Damage Bonus: +17D6 Build: 18 Magic Points: 42 Move: 20 flying 
Cyaegha
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 5 Fighting attacks: If freed, Cyaegha drifts 
over an area, surveying all below, randomly picking human targets to crush and squeeze with its tentacles. Fighting 100% (50/20), damage 8D6 
Armor: None, but takes minimum damage from impaling weapons and bullets. Reaching 0 hit points, Cyaegha retreats or reforms un­derground. 
Spells: Whatever Call/Dismiss or Con­tact spells the Keeper wishes. 
Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see Cyaegha. 



Daoloth 
Not shapeless, but so complex that the eye could recognise no describable shape. There were hemispheres and shining metal, coupled by long plastic rods. The rods were of a flat grey colour, so that he could not make out which were nearer; they merged into a flat mass from which protruded individual cylinders. As he looked at it, he had a curious feeling that eyes gleamed from between these rods; but wherever he glanced at the construction, he saw only the spaces between them. 
—Ramsey Campbell, The Render of the Veils 
A strange, geometric being, Daoloth does not appear to be particularly malign. It lives somewhere beyond our universe, but may be summoned into it. 
Cult 
Daoloth is currently worshiped on Yuggoth and other alien worlds, but seems to have little earthly cult. His astrolo­ger-priests can see the past and future, and perceive how objects extend into the last dimension. They gain the power 
to travel into other dimensions and to see other types of reality. Seeing Daoloth is disastrous, for the human eye is unable to follow the god’s moving outline, thus causing madness in the beholder. Daoloth’s few human cultists summon the god only in 
absolute blackness. 
Other Characteristics 
The god’s presence causes disaster among humankind. If he is not carefully held inside some magical barrier, his form expands and en­gulfs anyone nearby. Those engulfed by Daoloth are immediately sent to distant and dismal worlds or alternate dimensions, from which they rarely return. Daoloth moves unconventionally, either 

by expanding his shape or by slipping through di­mensions. He expands at 8 meters radius per round and can continue expanding to any size. 
DAOLOTH, The Render of the Veils 
STR N/A CON 500 SIZ varies INT 250 POW 350 DEX 150 HP 100 Damage Bonus: N/A Build: varies Magic Points: 70 Move: 8 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Daoloth doesn’t fight in any normal way. Engulf: Automatic success; sends victim to another plane of ex­
istence. 

Armor: Anything striking or penetrating Daoloth is transported to another dimension, but any spell which the Keeper thinks appropriate might cause harm or repel. 

Daoloth 

Spells: It might know any spell dealing with seeing or traveling to other worlds, planes and dimensions, and whatever other spells the Keeper thinks appropriate. 
Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points in the first round the god is visible; every round thereafter automatically lose 1D10 San­ity points while nearby. 

Eihort 
Then came pale movement in the well, and something clambered up from the dark, a bloated blanched oval support­ed on myriad fleshless legs. Eyes formed in the gelatinous oval and stared at him. 
—Ramsey Campbell, Before the Storm 

Eihort is a monstrous being that lives in a labyrinthine net­work of tunnels deep beneath England’s Severn Valley. 
Cult 
Eihort’s only known cults are in the Severn Valley, partic­ularly in the cities of Brichester and Camside. Typically a group of demented humans is led by a group of Eihort’s Brood, which have formed themselves into the simula­crum of a human. 
Other Characteristics Eihort’s Brood: small, globular, white grub-like or spi­der-like creatures, easily slain. Their systematic destruction risks Eihort’s wrath. After their grisly birth, the Brood hide until the Great Old Ones walk the Earth again. Then they will metamorphose into smaller versions of Eihort and thereafter attend him. Brood are not intelligent or aggres­sive, however they can gnaw motionless targets to the bone. In 1D10 minutes a group can do 1 hit point damage to a defenseless target. 

Eihort’s Bargain: Cornering a human victim, Eihort ques­tions the captive and if the captive refuses Eihort, it smashes him or her to death. 
Whoever answers and accepts Eihort’s Bargain accepts the implantation of immature Brood into his or her body. Progressively horrible and sanity-wracking dreams begin, costing 1D4 Sanity points and adding 1D3 Cthulhu Mythos, affecting the victim in the coming months. The maturing Brood fight the Bargainer for control of his or her body. Af­ter 1D100 months, the struggle climaxes as terrifying visions wrack the Bargainer’s brain, and at last the mature Brood split open the Bargainer’s body and emerge from within and scuttle off. The Bargainer always dies. 
EIHORT, God of the Labyrinth 
STR 220 CON 400 SIZ 250 INT 125 POW 150 DEX 60 HP 65 Damage Bonus: +5D6 Build: 6 Magic Points: 30 Move: 8/1 Burrowing 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: May kick and crush anyone near enough. Bite: The bite injects a paralytic poison requiring targets to make 
an Extreme CON roll or become paralyzed for 1D6 hours. Crush: May crush all targets within a 10-foot area. Fighting 70% (35/14), half damage bonus Bite 70% (35/14), half damage bonus + paralytic poison (see above) Crush 85% (42/17), damage equals damage bonus to all in 10-foot radius 
Armor: None. All physical attacks do minimum damage. Addi­tionally, Eihort regenerates 3 hit points per combat round. Brought to 0 hit points, his remains ooze into the ground and he regenerates somewhere far within the earth. 
Spells: Cloud Memory, all Contact Deity spells, Create Gate, Sum­mon/Bind Chthonian, Summon/Bind Ghoul. Sanity Loss: 1D6/1D20 Sanity points to see Eihort. 
Ghatanothoa 
Nothing I could say could even adumbrate the loathsome, unholy, non-human, extra-galactic horror and hatefulness and unutterable evil of that forbidden spawn of black chaos and illimitable night. 
— H.P. Lovecraft and Hazel Heald, Out of the Eons 
Ghatanothoa is known to be exceedingly horrible, with myriad tentacles, maws, and sensory organs, with a defi­nite dreadful outline. In ancient Mu, Ghatanothoa dwelt in a burrow beneath a city originally built by Fungi from Yuggoth, though generally inhabited by primeval humans. The burrow was surmounted by a truncated volcanic cone. When Mu sank, the god’s home was overlaid by the waves and he was no longer free. Sometimes tectonic upheavals force Ghatanothoa’s dwelling place to the surface, as if in horrific preparation for that awful day when it will rise, along with R’lyeh, to sink no more. Investigators might 

Ghatanothoa 
beware any island between New Zealand and Chile that matches the description of Ghatanothoa’s abode. 
Cult 
Ghatanothoa is sometimes tied to lloigor. At present, no human cultists are known for him. In ancient times, the priests of Mu unwillingly offered periodic human sacrifices to Ghatanothoa, lest he rise from his extinct volcano and work greater carnage. Certain fungi from Yuggoth also served Ghatanothoa in these ancient times. 
GHATANOTHOA, Lord of the Volcano 
STR 450 CON 400 SIZ 700 INT 100 POW 175 DEX 40 HP 110 Damage Bonus: +13D6 Build: 14 Magic Points: 35 Move: 9 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 1 
Curse of Ghatanothoa: Anyone in visual proximity to a perfect image of Ghatanothoa receives this curse. Each round that the image of Ghatanothoa is present, the human witnesses must attempt CON rolls. Upon failure, the investigator loses 3D10 DEX as muscles stiffen and creeping paralysis begins. If an investigator’s DEX is brought to zero, complete immobilization occurs, a petrifaction process normally irreversible. 
In a few minutes, the victim’s flesh and sinews rapidly harden to the consistency of leather and bone. The brain and other inter­nal organs remain fresh and alive in this hard, immobile case, aware yet unbearably imprisoned. Only the destruction of the brain can end the victim’s suffering. The blind, numb victim loses 1D6 Sanity points per day until reaching permanent madness or the forgiving release of death. 
Note: When he is at less than 0 hit points, the Great Old One’s curse is inoperative. Once regenerating to at least +1 hit point, petrifaction proceeds normally. 
Fighting attacks: Attacks mostly with tentacles. 
Fighting  80% (40/16), damage 7D6 
Armor: 10-point hide. Regenerates an additional 10 hit points per round. 
Spells: Knows all Summon/Bind spells, as well as Contact spells for Great Old Ones, Chthonians, Deep Ones, Flying Polyps, Ghouls, Star-Spawn of Cthulhu, and Sand Dwellers. 
Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see Ghatanothoa, but that’s the least of the investigator’s troubles. 

Gla'aki 
From an oval body protruded countless thin, pointed spines of multi-coloured metal; at the more rounded end of the oval a circular, thick-lipped mouth formed the centre of a spongy face, from which rose three yellow eyes on thin stalks. Around the underside of the body were many white pyramids, presumably used for locomotion. The diameter of the body must have been ten feet at its least wide…long stalks were twisting above it…the shape towered, pulsing and shaking with deafening vibration…a spine stiffened toward a victim. 
—Ramsey Campbell, The Inhabitant of the Lake 

Gla'aki currently dwells at the bottom of a lake in the Severn River Valley in England, from whence it summons new cultists by a “dream-pull”—the sending of hypnotic dreams to potential initiates. Gla'aki is weak now, and without the strength drawn from the initiation process, it cannot send the dream-pull any distance. When someone comes to live nearby it can send the dreams, or it can dispatch servants of Gla'aki to capture or guide new initiates. 
Cult 
Gla'aki heads a particularly loathsome cult in which most members are undead. On occasion living humans have worshiped Gla'aki, however, currently the area around his lake is deserted. 
Other Characteristics Dream-Pull: Gla'aki mainly uses the dream-pull to draw victims to the lake for initiation. The target’s chance to be overwhelmed by the dream is equal to Gla'aki’s magic points minus the victim’s magic points on 1D100. For each half-mile of distance between the victim and Gla'aki’s lair, add 1 magic point to the victim’s total for the effect of this calculation. Gla'aki can try once per night, for as many nights as desired. 
For initiation, the novice stands on the lake shore while Gla'aki rises from the deep. Gla'aki drives one of its spines into the victim’s chest and then, on the next round, injects a fluid into the victim. Normally the spine kills the human victim. The spine detaches from Gla'aki and from it grow protrusions through the victim’s body. When growth is complete, in a night or two, the spine drops off, leaving a livid spot that does not bleed and from which emanates a network of red lines. The victim is then an undead slave, a servant of Gla'aki. Conditions: if the damage from the spine fails to kill the target before the fluid is injected, the victim becomes an undead horror, but is not subject to the will of Gla'aki. If possible Gla'aki has its servants capture such an individual and hold him or her while it drives in another spine to force proper servitude. If the victim manages to break off the spine during the round in which he or she is stabbed and before the fluid is injected, he or she dies anyway but does not be­come an undead slave of Gla'aki. In the rare instance that the spine does not cause enough damage to kill the victim, and is broken off before the fluid is injected, the victim can re­main a normal human being. Gla'aki’s undead slaves may hold novices tightly to prevent them from breaking off spines prematurely. 


Gla'aki, The Inhabitant of the Lake 
STR 200 CON 300 SIZ 450 INT 150 POW 140 DEX 50 HP 75 Damage Bonus: +7D6 Build: 8 Magic Points: 28 Move: 6 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Attacks with its spines, either ramming them or 
shooting them into the target. Fighting 100% (50/20), damage 3D10 Armor: 40-point integument. Each spine has 4 points of armor and 6 hit points. Spells: Gla'aki knows most spells, and teaches many to his wor­shiper-slaves. Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D20 Sanity points to see Gla'aki. 
Hastur the Unspeakable 
Utterly alien landscape…Foreground a deep lake. Hali? In five minutes the water began to ripple where something rose. Facing inward. A titanic aquatic being, tentacled. Octopoid, but far, far larger—ten—twenty times larger than the giant Octopus apallyon of the west coast. What was its neck alone 
easily fifteen rods in diameter. Could not risk chance of seeing its face. —August Derleth, The Gable Window 
Hastur the Unspeakable dwells near the star Aldebaran in the constellation Taurus. He is connected with the mystic Lake of Hali, the Yellow Sign and Carcosa, as well as the things that dwell therein. He may be connected in some way with the power of flight through space. His appearance is disputed. In a reported instance of possession by Hastur, a corpse took on a bloated scaly look, and the limbs became boneless and fluid. The things in the Lake of Hali look oc­topoid from a rear view and are related to Hastur. They also have unbearably horrible faces. Still, Hastur’s appearance is largely up to the individual Keeper. Hastur is served well by the byakhee, an interstellar flying race. 
The cult of Hastur is moderately common on Earth, and the abominable Tcho-Tcho peoples are reputedly among his worshipers, as are the Brothers of the Yellow Sign. Hastur’s cult is particularly loathsome, and is more widely known of than it is belonged to. Worshipers refer to Hastur as He Who Is Not to Be Named. This may be a misapprehension, stemming from his title, “The Unspeakable.” 
Other Characteristics 
Hastur is summonable only at night. When Hastur is pres­ent, each round three individuals within 20 yards of the horror must successfully Dodge or be grasped by Hastur and destroyed on the following round. Hastur does not normally attack friends or worshipers. He must always leave that portion of the Earth where Aldebaran is below the horizon. 
HASTUR, He Who Is Not to Be Named 
STR 600 CON 1000 SIZ 500 INT 75 POW 175 DEX 150 HP 150 Damage Bonus: +13D6 Build: 14 Magic Points: 30 Move: 16/25 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: Whatever he is, Hastur has tentacles and claws 
among his appendages. Fighting 100% (50/20), damage is instantaneous death Armor: 30-point thick, scaly, rubbery and baggy hide. Spell: Brew Space Mead, all Call and Contact spells, Summon/Bind Byakhee, and others the Keeper finds appropriate. Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see Hastur. 
Hastur 
Ithaqua 
The stars had been blotted out…the great cloud which had obscured the sky looked curiously like the outline of a great man. And…where the top of the “cloud” must have been, where the head of the thing should have been, there were two gleaming stars, visible despite the shadow, two gleaming stars, 
burning bright—like eyes! —August Derleth, The Thing That Walked on the Wind 
Ithaqua is reported from the Arctic and sub-Arctic, where Native Americans encountered him. He is known to stalk the wastes, tracking down hapless travellers and carrying them off. Such unfortunates are sometimes found alive, and they linger living for a while, unable to explain what has happened to them. Most are found dead weeks or months later, buried partway as if dropped from a height, frozen solid in positions of great agony, and missing random body parts. 
Cult 
Ithaqua has a minimal cult, though many fear him in the far north. The inhabitants of Siberia and Alaska may leave sacrifices to keep the Wendigo from haunting their camps, but organized worship seems to be rare. Ithaqua is more widely worshiped on the faraway world of Borea. 
ITHAQUA, The Wind-Walker, The Wendigo 

STR 250 DEX 150  CON 750 SIZ 500 INT 50 HP 125 Damage Bonus: +8D6 Build: 9 Magic Points: 35 Move: 10/30 flying  POW 175  
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1  

Fighting attacks: This huge being may stomp, punch and crush its targets. If it uses its claws all armor is ignored. If 
within reach, Ithaqua may grab with one mighty claw per round. Anyone grabbed is automatically held as well, if Ithaqua 
desires. Wind Gust: If Ithaqua is within a few dozen yards, he can use mighty winds 
to attempt to whisk victims into the air. Players of those attacked this way must make an opposed STR roll. If Ithaqua is attacking several investiga­tors, divide his STR among them. The damage is in the lift and drop—1D10 
x 10 feet. Each 10 feet dropped equals 1D6 damage. Fighting 80% (40/16), damage bonus Wind Gust 100% (50/20), special 
(see above) Armor: 10 points of skin and thick rime. 
Spells: All Call and Contact spells. 


Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see Ithaqua. 1/1D6 San­ity points to hear the howl of the Wendigo on the North Wind. 

King in Yellow, Avatar of Hastur 
He stands in state upon the balcony. He has no face, and is twice as tall as a man, He wears pointed shoes under his tattered, fantastically coloured robes, and a streamer of silk 
appears to fall from the pointed tip of his hood… At times he appears to be winged; at other, haloed. —James Blish, More Light 
The King in Yellow might be human-seeming, clad in tat­tered yellow or parti-colored rags and wearing the Pallid Mask. The rags are extensions of the entity’s flesh, while the mask covers horrible pseudopods that can attach to a target and drain the very life from them (POW). Above all, the be­ing possesses a loathsome plasticity of shape, able to stretch and change at will. This is the most frequently encountered avatar of Hastur the Unnameable. 
Cult 
Worshippers are often solitary madmen—artists and poets, driven mad by reading the haunting play The King In Yellow (see page @@), and inspired by its cruel beauty to create art that renders human experience meaningless. The insani­ty-inducing Yellow Sign (see page @@) is often embossed or stamped on editions of the evil book. The sign a focus for madness, helping to warp the dreams of those who see it. 
THE KING IN YELLOW, Avatar of Hastur, Lord of Carcosa, Master of the Yellow Sign 
STR 125 CON 530 SIZ 70 INT 250 POW 175 DEX 135 HP 60 Damage Bonus: +1D6 Build: 2 Magic Points: 35 Move: 15 or can appear/disappear at will. 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 gaze attack, 6 razor sharp tatters, or 1 face tentacle. Fighting attacks: Some say the King has a strange facial tentacle hidden behind his pallid mask with which he kisses his wor­

The Yellow Sign 

Purported to be the great seal of He Who Is Not To Be Named in his form as the King in Yellow, the Yellow 
roll (0/1) and this is repeated each night until either they succeed in the Sanity roll or madness overtakes them. 

shipers. Others say when he dances his tattered robes extend as pseudopodia, cutting those around him like razors. 
Gaze of the Yellow King: Induces paroxysms of fear by staring at the target, costing the unfortunate 1D6 Sanity points per round while the King in Yellow focuses upon them (costing the King 3 magic points per round). To avoid the gaze for a round, the target must make an Extreme POW roll. 
Fighting 100% (50/20), damage by razor sharp tatters is 1D6 + damage bonus +1D6 POW, or by face tentacle is 1D10 + dam­age bonus + 1D10 POW per round whilst attached. 
Gaze Target must make an Extreme POW roll to resist, special (see 
above) Armor: None. Spells: All Call and Contact spells, and others as the Keeper desires. Sanity Loss: With the Pallid Mask upon its ‘face’ there is no Sanity 
loss; however in any other form, or with the mask removed, it costs 1D3/1D10 Sanity points to see the King in Yellow. 
Nodens 
And upon dolphins’ backs was balanced a vast crenelate shell wherein rode the grey and awful form of primal Nodens, Lord of the Great Abyss…Then hoary Nodens reached forth a wizened hand and helped Olney and his host into the vast shell. 
— H.P. Lovecraft, The Strange High House in the Mist 
He usually takes the form of a normal human, grey-beard­ed and hoary. Nodens often rides in a chariot formed from a huge seashell drawn by unearthly monsters or fantastic beings from earthly legend. 
Cult 

At times, Nodens is almost friendly to humankind. He has visited Earth on occasion, and is known to have aided some who were pursued or harassed by the Great Old Ones or Nyarlathotep. Nodens has no cult on Earth. He is served by nightgaunts. 
NODENS, Lord of the Great Abyss 


Build: 4 Magic Points: 100 Move: 12 
ATTACKS 
Fighting attacks: Nodens never physically attacks a foe. Faced by a weak opponent, he summons nightgaunts in sufficient quantity to carry off the target. Facing a powerful foe, Nodens attempts to dismiss the enemy: an opposed POW roll. With a success, the foe remains and Nodens voluntarily departs to avoid a struggle. If Nodens is forced to leave because of some such being’s resisting his dismissal, he has been known to take a favored human with him partway, left in some random loca­tion. He is recorded as having taken a human on trips to the outer reaches of the galaxy (and back again). 
Armor: None to start, but may choose to add armor by spending 1 magic point per point of armor desired—this armor lasts until either moonset or sunrise. 
Spells: Can call nightgaunts to his aid at the rate of 1D10 night­gaunts per magic point expended; Nodens may summon other servants at a rate of one per magic point expended; he heals himself by expending a magic point per point of damage; Keepers should add other spells as thought charac­teristic of this god. 
Sanity Loss: No Sanity points loss for seeing Nodens. 
Nyarlathotep 
A tall, slim figure with the young face of an antique pharaoh, gay with prismatic robes and crowned 
with a pshent that glowed with inherent light…the fascination of a dark god or fallen archangel, and 
around whose eyes there lurked the languid sparkle of capricious humor. —H.P. Lovecraft, The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath 
Nyarlathotep is the messenger, heart, and soul of the Gods. He is the only one to have a true personality, and he claims to have a thousand different forms. To him, causing mad­ness and insanity is more important and enjoyable than mere death or destruction. 
Only a few of Nyarlathotep’s 999 forms have been de­scribed. The Black Pharaoh is an Egyptian-looking human. The Bloody Tongue is an enormous monster with clawed appendages and a single long blood-red tentacle in place of a face. This tentacle stretches forward when the Thing howls at the moon. The Haunter of the Dark is black and winged, with a tri-lobed red eye, and cannot withstand light. The Bloated Woman is a mammoth woman whose body con­vulses with numerous tentacles. The Beast takes the form of Egypt’s Sphinx; however its face is filled with stars. There is some suggestion that the Black Man of European witch ceremonies is also a form of Nyarlathotep. 
Cult 
Nyarlathotep is typically worshiped though one of his forms, or ‘masks’. There are numerous such cults, spread across the entire globe. 


The Brotherhood of the Black Pharaoh is centered in Cairo and has a powerful branch in London. The Cult of the Bloody Tongue is known in Kenya and New York. The Starry Wisdom Cult of Providence worships the Haunter of the Dark, as does the Cult of the Sand Bat in Australia. Other known cults include Shanghai’s Order of the Bloated Woman and the global Brotherhood of the Beast. 
In addition, those worshiping the gods often do so in hope of gathering Nyarlathotep’s favor. Rewards to loyal slaves usually come through the Crawling Chaos, as many of the other Gods are too mindless to care. Nyarlathotep may grant worshipers knowledge of a spell, impart some destructive fact or divisive religious belief or grant a servitor monster as an assistant. Nyarlathotep’s gifts always seem to provoke turmoil among humanity and are particularly likely to bring suffering and terror to a gift’s recipient. 
Nyarlathotep has special servants, including the shan­taks and hunting horrors. He may gift any type of creature to a worshiper if he deems it good. Such a bequest involves at least the permanent donation of POW or other characteristic to Nyarlatho­
tep and other gods. 
Other Characteristics 
Nyarlathotep enacts the will of the Azathoth and other gods and is accurately referred to as their soul. He always attempts to bring madness to humanity and several prophecies, including the stories The Crawling Chaos, Nyarlathotep and the poem The Fungi from Yuggoth seem to state that someday Nyarlathotep himself will destroy humanity and possibly the entire planet. Nyarlathotep is always a mocking figure, evidently contemptuous of 
his masters. 

All invocations to Azathoth and many other gods include Nyarlathotep’s name, possibly recognizing him as their mes­senger. He is known and feared by all Mythos species and he occasionally requires things of them. 
In human form Nyarlathotep may try to corrupt or trick his foes by appearing as a friend, and is generally reluctant to reveal his supernatural powers unless pressed. Nyarlathotep usually reacts to challenges by summoning beings to carry off or otherwise dispose of foes. 
Nyarlathotep can summon a member of any race in this book (plus more that are not), at the cost of 1 magic point per 5 POW points the creature possesses. When in monster form, he tends to grasp his victims and then carry them off with him. 
NYARLATHOTEP, The Crawling Chaos 
Human Form 
STR 60  CON 95  SIZ 55  INT 430  POW 500  
DEX 95  APP 90  HP 15  
Damage Bonus: none.  


Build: 0 Magic Points: 12 Move: 12  
Monstrous Form  
STR 400  CON 250  SIZ 450  INT 430  POW 500  
DEX 95 APP N/A Damage Bonus: +10D6 Build: 11 Magic Points: 100 Move: 16  HP 70  
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1  

When in human form, Nyarlathotep can be slain by normal physi­cal means. If so slain, after collapsing the body begins to quake and swell, bursting to release a huge clawed monster (or some other monstrous form described previously). This unwelcome colossus then rises from the split corpse and disappears into the sky without further molesting the killer. 
When in monstrous form, Nyarlathotep is difficult to slay, however slaying does dispel him. Nyarlathotep’s clawed demon form changes continually; each round he will have at least two claws capable of attacking. 
Fighting attacks: As a human, has the usual range of unarmed attacks open to humanoids. As a monster he is able to use a multitude of appendages, depending on his form. 
Fighting (as a human) 100% (50/20), 1D3 or damage as per weap­
on Fighting (as a monster) 85% (42/17), 10D6 + damage bonus Armor: None, but brought to 0 hit points, he collapses on the 
ground, changes form (always to a more monstrous one, which causes his viewers to lose Sanity points) and then flies into interstellar space. 
Spells: Nyarlathotep knows all Mythos spells; he can summon monsters at the rate of 1 magic point per 5 POW points the monster has; he may summon a shantak, hunting horror or servitor of the Outer Gods at the cost of a single magic point. 
Sanity Loss: No loss to see his human form; in many of his other 999 forms, 1D10/1D100 to see Nyarlathotep. 
Nyogtha 
An insidious odor began to penetrate the room. It was vaguely reptilian, musky, and nauseating. The disk lifted inexorably, and a little finger of blackness crept out from beneath its edge came a great wave of iridescent blackness, neither liquid nor 
solid, a frightful gelatinous mass. —Henry Kuttner, The Salem Horror 

Nyogtha is a minor deity reported to inhabit underground caverns on Earth. It may be related to Cthulhu. Nyogtha re­sembles a blob of living darkness that may throw out black tentacles or pseudopods at will. 
Cult 
Nyogtha has a few worshipers, mostly witches and their ilk. It teaches them spells on occasion in return for sacrifices and POW. In the Dreamlands, Nyogtha is worshiped by a band of ghouls. 
Some ghouls in the Waking World may practice this worship as well. 
Nyogtha 

NYOGTHA, The Thing That Should Not Be 
STR 425 CON 200 SIZ 400 INT 100 POW 140 DEX 100 HP 60 Damage Bonus: Made of such substance that damage bonus is not 
applicable Build: 10 Magic Points: 28 Move: 10 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: If Nyogtha strikes for damage, each target within 
10 yards takes 1D10 points of damage from numerous small wounds. Unless driven off by appropriate spells, Nyogtha grabs and drags its victim off to underground pits. Fighting 100% (50/20), damage 1D10 to all within 10 yards 
Armor: Ignores the first 10 points of damage received each round from all sources; at 0 hit points, Nyogtha is dispelled and will leave. 
Spells: All Call and Contact spells; Create Gate. Sanity Loss: 1D6/1D20 Sanity points to see Nyogtha. 
Rhan-Tegoth 
An almost globular torso, with six long, sinuous limbs terminat­ing in crab-like claws. From the upper end a subsidiary globe bulged forward bubble-like; its triangle of three staring, fishy eyes, its foot-long and evidently flexible proboscis, and a distended lateral system analogous to gills suggested that it was a head. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Horror in the Museum 

This minor god ruled what is Alaska today, feeding on stringy hominids who ran squealing before his might. Perhaps as late as the last glacial cycle, Rhan-Tegoth entered into a deep hibernation from which he would not or could not wake. Rediscovered by modern men, most mistake the unmoving god for a ghastly statue. 

Rhan-Tegoth 
Cult 
In ancient times Rhan-Tegoth was worshiped by a primitive human people, perhaps of the Inuit. Since he has gone into hibernation, his cult has faded. The bestial gnoph-keh of the northern wastes may also have some relation with Rhan-Tegoth. 
Other Characteristics 
A fetid amphibian-like being, he requires blood sacrifices of at least SIZ 75 daily. To feed, he grasps a screaming victim and draws him or her into the mass of tentacles. There the tentacles begin to drain the prey of blood, organic fluids, and 5 STR points per round. For every 10 such points, increase Rhan-Tegoth’s CON by 5, to a maximum of 800 CON. Ex­cess points are lost. Unfed, Rhan-Tegoth loses 1D100 CON each day until reaching 300, and then re-enters hibernation. 
A sacrifice fully drained by Rhan-Tegoth is left flattened and riddled with hundreds of tiny puncture wounds. The blood and body fluids sucked out, only the crushed shell of the corpse remains. Seeing such a corpse costs 1/1D6 Sanity points. 
RHAN-TEGOTH, Terror of the Hominids 
STR 200 CON 300* SIZ 150 INT 75 POW 175 DEX 75 HP 45** **(base amount; increases as he feeds) Damage Bonus:+3D6 Build: 4 Magic Points: 35 Move: 10/14 Swim 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1D6+2 Fighting attacks: Able to attack with claws, legs and tentacles for a 
variety of attacks. Fighting 80% (40/16), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Armor: 10 points from thick, slime-covered skin and tentacles. 
Also regenerates 1 hit point per round. Spells: Any. Sanity Loss: 1D8/1D20 Sanity points to see Rhan-Tegoth. 
Shub-Niggurath 
“Iä! Iä! Shub-Niggurath! The Black Goat of the Woods with a Thousand Young!” —H.P. Lovecraft, The Whisperer in Darkness 


Shub-Niggurath is often referred to in rituals and spells. It has been guessed that she is a perverse fertility deity. 
In one of her few descriptions, Shub-Niggurath is said to be an enormous cloudy mass. This mass doubtless boils and festers. It is likely that parts of the mist coalesce at times, forming horrendous body parts, ropy black tentacles, slime-dripping mouths, or short writhing legs, ending in black hooves which may account for the titular reference to “goat”. When she arrives, she may bud off dark young. 
Recent information suggests that her milk may have remarkable properties, but Keepers must establish this. 
Cult 
Worshiped extensively, she may have connections with druids and similar groups. Worshipers of Shub-Niggurath generally form into gangs or congregations, as do Cthulhu’s cultists. Her emissaries and stand-ins, the dark young, may represent the aid she grants worshipers. 
Summoned, Shub-Niggurath attacks non-worshipers present. 
She is often summoned specifically to accept sacrifices. Shub-Niggurath can be dismissed by those who know her summoning spell and it is possible to hurt her enough to make her leave. 
SHUB-NIGGURATH, The Black Goat of the Woods 
STR 360 CON 850 SIZ 600 INT 105 POW 350 DEX 140 HP 145 Damage Bonus: +11D6 Build: 12 Magic Points: 70 Move: 15 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Shub-Niggurath has a multitude of tentacles, 
which flail around and may hit opponents. 

Seize (mnvr): Shub-Niggurath has dozens of tentacles, but can only seize one victim in a round. With a successful catch, the investigator is seized and whipped to the goddess’ body to be 
Shub-Niggurath 
drained of body fluids by one of her many mouths, the bite permanently draining 3D10 STR from the victim per round. 
While being drained, the victim is held absolutely helplessly, and may not cast spells, expend magic points, or perform any act whatsoever except to writhe in pain and scream. 
In battle against more powerful beings, Shub-Niggurath still attacks with one tentacle per opponent, but after a tentacle strikes it holds on, and a second tentacle attacks, and so on. Each additional successful attack permits a new mouth to begin to drain her gigantic victim. 
Trample: Once per round, Shub-Niggurath may trample beings of SIZ 300 or less. The trample attack is effective against all such beings in her path, which averages 10-20 yards across. 
Fighting 75% (37/15) half damage bonus 
Seize (mnvr) grabs one victim and automatic bite next round 
Bite Automatic when seized, damage is 3D10 STR drained per round 
Trample 75% (37/15) damage equals damage bonus 
Armor: No armor, however her slimy mist body is immune to physical weapons. Magical weapons or fire, electricity, similar energies damage her normally. Her ropy tentacles and gooey vapors can re-join, effectively allowing her to regenerate points of damage. Each magic point she expends enables her to heal 2 points of damage. 
Spells: Shub-Niggurath knows at minimum all spells pertaining to the gods; she is known to have imparted Create Gate, Curse of Azathoth and Voorish Sign to favorites. 
Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see Shub-Niggurath. 

Shudde M’ell 
A great gray thing a mile long chanting and exuding strange acids…charging through the depths of the earth at a fantastic speed, in a dreadful fury…melting basaltic rocks like butter under a blowtorch. 
—Brian Lumley, The Burrowers Beneath 

He is preeminent among the chthonians and apparently is the largest and most evil of his kind. According to legends he once was imprisoned beneath G’harne, however is now free to wander the Earth with his kin. 
Cult 
Chthonians, Shudde M’ell among them, are not much wor­shiped by humans nowadays, though druids are rumored to have done so in the past and remnant Stone Age tribes may continue the practice. Perhaps the races that built G’harne did so to honor Shudde M’ell. 

Other Characteristics 
By himself, Shudde M’ell can cause a local earthquake of shocking intensity. In conjunction with other chthonians, he can create strong earthquakes of regional size, strong enough to topple buildings or destroy bridges. 
If Shudde M’ell attacks directly, a vast hole opens up, accompanied by a terrible chanting noise and slobbering, sucking sounds. Everything over the hole, which is at least 1D10+10 yards across, is sucked in and destroyed. Chtho­nians then pour out of the hole and attack survivors. 
SHUDDE M'ELL, The Burrower Beneath 
STR 450 CON 400 SIZ 600 INT 100 POW 175 DEX 75 HP 100 Damage Bonus: +12D6 Build: 13 Magic Points: 35 Move: 8/8 burrowing 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: May use its bulk and tentacles to bash and crush. Grab and Feed (mnvr): May grab an opponent with a tentacle and 
drain 3D10 CON per round Crush: Once per round it may use its bulk to crush all before it. Fighting 100% (50/20), damage bonus 
Grab and feed (mnvr) damage 6D6 + 3D10 CON drain per round Crush 90% (45/18), damage 12D6 to all within 12 yards radius Armor: 8-point skin; regenerates 5 hit points per round. Spells: Knows all spells the Keeper finds appropriate; has taught 
many concerning the Great Old Ones and servants. Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D20 Sanity points to see Shudde M’ell. 

Tsathoggua 
Tsathoggua 
He discerned in a dark recess the formless bulking of a couchant mass. And the mass stirred a little at his approach, and put forth with infinite slothfulness a huge and toad­shaped head. And the head opened its eyes very slowly, as if half awakened from slumber, so that they were visible as two slits of oozing phosphor in the black browless face. 
—Clark Ashton Smith, The Seven Geases 
He dwells in the black gulf of N’Kai, where he first arrived on Earth from Saturn. He is one of the less malevolent beings of the Cthulhu Mythos, though still terrible. Tsathoggua is usually represented as having a fat furry body and a toad­like head with bat-like ears and fur. His mouth is wide and his eyes always are half-closed, as if sleepy. It is also said that he can freely change his shape. 
Cult 
Tsathoggua was worshiped by serpent people and the furry subhuman voormis in ancient times, and by sorcerers and wizards in later times. He has given magic gates and spells to the faithful in the past. He is served by a race of entities known, for lack of a better name, as the formless spawn. They dwell in N’Kai and in his temples. 
Other Characteristics 
When encountered, ask for a group Luck roll from the inves­tigators to determine if Tsathoggua is hungry. If Tsathoggua is not hungry, he ignores the investigators and pretends to be asleep. 
TSATHOGGUA, The Sleeper of N’kai 
STR 250 CON 600 SIZ 150 INT 150 POW 175 DEX 135 HP 75 Damage Bonus: +4D6 Build: 5 Magic Points: 35 

Move: 16 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Tsathoggua may kick and strike opponents. Hold and feed (mnvr): If hungry, Tsathoggua grabs an investiga­
tor and pulls the victim to him: in each following round the character loses 5 points from each characteristic until they are reduced to zero or until Tsathoggua is driven off. The victim will be in great agony, with acid burns, vitriol running through his veins, body punctures everywhere, etc. In this case (if the investigator somehow manages to live and escape) a full week of hospital care restores one point to each characteristic. 

Fighting 100% (50/20), damage bonus Hold and Feed (mnvr) used to seize after which drain 5 points from each characteristic per round Armor: Regenerates 30 hit points per round from wounds and punctures; however fire, electricity and other such forces have normal effects on the monstrous god. Spells: Broad magical powers, as befits a Great Old One; he is recorded as having taught Create Gate and various Summon/ Bind spells to humans. Sanity Loss: 0/1D10 Sanity points to see Tsathoggua. 
Tulzscha 
A belching column of sick greenish flame…spouting volca­nically from depths profound and inconceivable, casting no shadows as healthy flame should, and coating the nitrous stone with a nasty, venomous verdigris. For in all that seething combustion no warmth lay, but only the clamminess of death and corruption. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Festival. 

At the court of Azathoth, it is a blazing green ball of flame, dancing with brethren gods before the Daemon Sultan. Called to our world, it assumes a gaseous form, penetrates the planet to the core and then erupts from below as a pillar of flame. It cannot move from where it emerges. 
Cult 

A few pockets of cultists worship this obscure entity, gener­ally in subterranean temples, and especially during equinox­es, solstices, and important conjunctions. Tulzscha thrives on death, corruption and decay. 
TULZSCHA, The Green Flame 
STR 300 CON 180 SIZ 390 INT 75 POW 75 DEX 60 HP 57 Damage Bonus: N/A Build: 9 Magic Points: 15 Move: 0 (on surface) 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Being close enough to engage in combat causes 
3D6 fire damage. 
Flame Gout: Effective at 50 feet or less; 1 attack per round. The gout of green fireballs may be dodged. With a successful attack, the target ages 2D10 years. The target must make CON and POW rolls, with the losses expressed as 1D6/3D10 CON and 1D6/3D10 POW, respectively for success/failure. A second POW roll is necessary as well, failing it, roll 1D6: 1-2 = lose 5 STR; 3-4 = lose 5 DEX; 5-6 = lose 5 APP. 
Fighting Automatic 3D6 damage when in fighting range Flame Gout 80% (40/16), damage special (see above) Armor: None, but immune to impaling weapons and to heat, cold, acid, and electricity. Explosives and all other physical attacks do minimum damage. Magic affects it normally, but Tulzscha can only be driven away by reaching 0 hit points. Spells: All in the Grimoire and as the Keeper wishes. Sanity Loss: 1D3/1D20 Sanity points to see Tulzscha. 
Ubbo-Sathla 
There, in the gray beginning of Earth, the formless mass that was Ubbo-Sathla reposed amid the slime and the vapors. Headless, without organs or members, it sloughed off from its oozy sides, in a slow, ceaseless wave, the amoebic forms that were the archetypes of earthly life. About it there lay the mighty tablets of star-quarried stone that were writ with the inconceivable wisdom of the premundane gods. 
—Clark Ashton Smith, Ubbo-Sathla 

The Unbegotten Source may have spawned the prototypes of all earthly life. It is hinted that it was from Ub­bo-Sathla’s tissues that the elder things created their dread shoggoths. Within the grotto of Ubbo-Sathla, 
Ubbo-Sathla has no human cult, although the mi-go and other alien races may worship it. The Book of Eibon and the Necronomicon mention this god. 
This god dwells in a cold, dank cavern, and never leaves its lair unless called or disturbed. The grotto can be entered 
entrances from the Cold Waste ofroutes may exist. 
Cult 
Other Characteristics 
several tablets of star-wrought stone rest, said to contain great knowledge and secrets of the gods. These tablets, the Elder Keys, remain an enigma. Seeking these tablets, even the most powerful sorcerers have failed to return. 
An observer sees hundreds of pseudopods forming, flail­ing about, grasping prey and being absorbed back into the body mass at all times. Remaining more than a few minutes in the god’s presence insures that one or more investigators will be attacked. 
Spawn of Ubbo-Sathla: It continually produces 1D10 offspring per round, some of which it eats and others that escape. Those surviving fulfill every whim and urge of their primal, mindless sire. Generally encountered only in Ubbo-Sathla’s primal grotto, no two spawn are exactly alike. All prefer surprise attacks from ambush: some attack with sticky filaments, some with pseudopods, some with gelati­nous tentacles, and so on. 
UBBO-SATHLA, The Unbegotten Source 
STR N/A CON 1000 SIZ 1000 INT 0 POW 375 DEX N/A HP 200 Damage Bonus: N/A Build: 9 Magic Points: 12 Move: 0 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Lashes out with pseudopods.to grab the target 
and then absorb them into its bulk. Each pseudopod has a reach of 100 yards. 
Fighting 90% (45/18), damage grasp and absorb Note: Any spot touched by Ubbo-Sathla is left devoid of life. Armor: Regenerates 25 hit points per round. Immune to impact, 
projectile, and cutting weapons; fire, spells, and enchanted weapons do normal damage. An Elder Sign will cause 3D6 damage, however the sign is destroyed. Reaching 0 hit points the god seeps back into its cavern or a fissure and regenerates fully. 
Skills: Generate Spawn 100%. Spells: None, but Ubbo-Sathla controls its spawn at any reasonable distance. Sanity Loss: 1D8/5D10 Sanity points to see Ubbo-Sathla. 

SPAWN OF UBBO-SATHLA 
char. averages rolls 
STR 110 (1D6 to 6D10+6 x5) CON 80 (3D6+6 x5) SIZ 115 (1D6 to 6D10+10 x5) INT 0 (0) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 70 (4D6 x5) HP: 19 Average Damage Bonus: +2D6 Average Build: 3 Average Magic Points: 10 Move: 8 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Sticky filaments and other appendages attempt to draw the target close enough so it can be digested. Swallow (mnvr): Attacks with sticky filaments, pseudopods or with gelatinous tentacles. Whatever the attack, a success draws the target into the spawn’s body, where it is digested at the rate of 1D6 hit points per round. Once swallowed, no action is possi­
ble, though friends may attempt to free the victim. Fighting 75% (37/15), damage 1D6 per round when swallowed Swallow (mnvr) draws target into body, digested at 1D6 damage 
per round Armor: Immune to blows and cuts; fire, magic, and enchanted 
weapons harm them normally. Spells: None. Skills: Stealth 90%. Sanity Loss: 1/1D8 Sanity points to see a spawn of Ubbo-Sathla. 
Y’golonac 
He saw why the shadow on the frosted pane yesterday had been headless, and he screamed. As the desk was thrust aside by the towering naked figure, on whose surface still hung rags of the tweed suit, Strutt’s last thought was an unbelieving conviction that this was happening because he had read the Revelations…but before he could scream out his protest his 
breath was cut off, as the hands descended on his face and the wet red mouths opened in their palms. —Ramsey Campbell, Cold Print 
Y’golonac is delineated in the Revelations of Gla'aki, an arcane book. It is a bloated, glowing figure who dwells underground in a vast ruin behind a wall of bricks. This prison may be near the Severn Valley city of Brichester, for it is known to frequent that place. Y’golonac is known to come when its name is read or spoken while evil is present. It is a minor god, but malignant. 
Cult 
Y’golonac has little cult following, but strives mightily after more worship, entrapping those who are subtly evil to be his priests. Y’Golonac’s notion of evil seems to be a shallow one, however. 
Other Characteristics 
Y’golonac may appear to be a normal, somewhat neurotic and flabby human. When he manages to contact a person 
Y'golonac 

that is debased in evil, the victim is possessed and absorbed by the deity and thereafter his shape can change at will from the form of the possessed individual to Y’golonac’s true form—glowing, headless, naked and huge, with wet mouths opening in the palms of the hands. 
To fight off a possession, the target must roll POW or less on 1D100 each round to avoid being overcome. Once over­come, the investigator loses 10 INT and 10 POW each round until Y’golonac is forced away or until his soul and mind are destroyed and replaced with Y’golonac’s—and Y’golonac departs only if he loses all his hit points. Y’golonac normally attacks people who have become aware of him, usually through reading at least a page of the Revelations of Gla'aki. Y’golonac is clever at getting persons to read passages from that horrid book without knowing they have done so. 
Y'GOLONAC, The Hand that Feeds 
STR 125 CON 625 SIZ 125 INT 150 POW 140 DEX 70 HP 75 Damage Bonus: +2D6 Build: 3 Magic Points: 28 Move: 10 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Being vaguely humanoid, Y’Golonac can kick 
and punch. 

Bite: In combat against more than one enemy, Y’golonac uses his mouths to devour and destroy foes. Damage done by the mouths does not heal naturally and INT and POW loss is per­manent, since the suppurating wounds never close. 
Fighting 100% (50/20), damage bonus Bite 100% (50/20), damage 1D4 non-healing damage and lose 5 INT and 5 POW each round Armor: None Spells: Summon/Bind and Contact spells, and whatever else the Keeper thinks appropriate. Sanity Loss: 1/1D20 Sanity points to witness human to Y’golonac transformation; 1/1D10+1 to see Y’golonac. 
Yibb-Tstll 
There, about the pulsating black body of the Ancient One, hugely winged reptilian creatures without faces cluttered and clutched at a multitude of blackly writhing, 
pendulous breasts! The eyes moved quickly, independently—sliding with vile viscosity over the whole rotten surface of 
Yibb-Tstll’s pulpy, glistening head! 
—Brian Lumley, The Horror at 

This horrible deity sees all time and space as it slowly rotates in the center of its clearing in the Jungle of Kled, in Earth’s Dreamlands. Beneath its billow­ing cloak are a multitude of nightgaunts, suckling and clutching at Yibb-Tstll’s 
breasts. 
Cult 
In ancient times Yibb-Tstll was worshiped as the god Yibb, however now he has no known cult. 
Yibb-Tstll is often approached by individuals—most often sorcerers—who either crave the use of Yibb-Tstll’s servitors, the nightgaunts, or ask for his beneficent touch. 
Other Characteristics 
Yibb-Tstll’s blood, known as The Black by sorcerers, can be summoned and can take independent action (see Call The Black page @@). 
Yibb-Tstll’s touch commonly causes a drastic loss, one of the Keeper’s choice—perhaps the immediate loss of all Sanity points, a quick death from fearful convulsions or per­haps running forward to suckle from the thing before being ripped to shreds. Changes might be physical. Sometimes they are beneficial. 
YIBB-TSTLL, The Patient One 
STR 200 CON 240 SIZ 260 INT 300 POW 325 DEX 80 HP 50 Damage Bonus: +5D6 Build: 6 Magic Points: 65 Move: 0 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Yibb-Tstll’s touch is deadly. 
Touch 100% (50/20), see above 
Armor: 12-point cloak, regenerates 5 hit points per round. Loss of all hit points dispels Yibb-Tstll, but he can soon reform or reappear somewhere else. 
Spells: All Contact spells, Call Yibb-Tstll, Contact Yibb-Tstll, Call The Black, Summon/Bind Nightgaunt, others as desired by the Keeper. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6/1D20 Sanity points to see Yibb-Tstll. 

The half-human father of serpents…the snake-god of the central plains tribes—presumably the primal source of the more southerly Quetzalcoatl or Kukulcan—was an odd, half-anthropomor­phic devil. —H.P. Lovecraft and Zealia Bishop, The Curse of Yig 
Yig is never clearly described, but may look like a scaly strong man with a serpent-like head or a normal head. He may be ac­companied by mobs of snakes. He seems to be mainly a North American deity. The notorious “curse of Yig” consists of 
madness and malformed children. 
Yig is recorded as being worshiped by 

Plains tribes and voodoo doctors, and may be some­how connected to Quetzalcoatl. 
He is also worshiped by the serpent people and their kin. Worshipers gain some immunity from poisonous snakes, the ability to talk to snakes, and some arcane rituals and spells. If someone exposes cult secrets or does harm to the cult, Yig sends a sacred snake to kill the offender. 
Other Characteristics 
A manifestation of Yig would be signaled largely or entirely by a carpet of serpents—rattlers in North America, puff adders or cobras elsewhere. 
A sacred snake of Yig is always a large individual of a species native to the area where manifested, with a white crescent on the top of its head. In North America, usually such a snake would be an enormous tom rattler, at least 5-6 feet long. The snake appears so swiftly that the victim is always startled and automatically hit unless he or she can react swiftly (roll Dodge skill). On subsequent rounds, successful Dodge use is required to avoid being bitten by the snake, which will pursue and continue to attack unless it is killed. No antivenin can save someone bitten by a sacred snake of Yig—bitten, he or she always dies after a few min­utes of agony. 
YIG, Father of Serpents 
STR 150 CON 600 SIZ 100 INT 100 POW 140 DEX 90 HP 70 Damage Bonus: +2D6 Build: 3 Magic Points: 28 Move: 10 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Yig has the usual range of unarmed attacks open 
to humanoids. Grasp (mnvr): In hand-to-hand combat, the hand of Yig grasps, not punches, doing crushing damage to an arm or leg. Bite: In the next combat round, Yig draws the victim to him (op­posed STR roll to resist) and bites. 
Fighting 90% (45/18), damage bonus Grasp (mnvr), crushing damage 2D6 Bite (after Grasp) 95% (47/19), damage 1D8 + instant death if 
normally, Yig’s 
and is 
Yig
 Keep-
Loss: 0/1D8 
Yog-Sothoth 
Great globes of light massing towards the opening…the breaking apart of the nearest globes, and the protoplasmic flesh that flowed blackly outward to join together and form that eldritch, hideous horror from outer space…whose mask was a congeries of iridescent globes…who froths as primal slime in nuclear chaos forever beyond the nethermost outposts of space and time! 
—August Derleth, The Lurker at the Threshold 
Yog-Sothoth dwells in the interstices between the planes that compose the universe. There it manifests as a con­glomeration of iridescent globes, which are always shifting, flowing into one another and breaking. This conglomera­tion is large, but variable, so that at one time it may appear to be 100 yards across and at another time half a mile or more. Connections between Yog-Sothoth’s appearance and sightings of so-called flying saucers are obvious. 
Cult 
Yog-Sothoth is preeminently the deity of sorcerers and wiz­ards. He grants them the power to travel between the planes, or the power to see into other planes via a piece of magic glass or the like. Yog-Sothoth may also give its slaves the ability to command various monsters from distant worlds. 
In return for these gifts, worshipers open the way for Yog-Sothoth to travel from his usual domains to Earth, to ravage and plunder. 
As Tawil at’Umr, all those wishing to travel to distant times and places may safely deal with him. This form seems to be the least malignant way in which to meet him but even then there is always a danger that Tawil at’Umr will remove its veil and cause utter madness and destruction to those dealing with it. 

Other Characteristics 
Yog-Sothoth holds the power to travel within the planes to reach any other time or space. Yog-Sothoth itself is cotermi­nous with all time and space. Because of this, Yog-Sothoth has been called the Key and the Gate. In Yog-Sothoth’s as­pect as Opener of the Way, it is recorded as Umr at’Tawil the correct Arabic form would be Tawil at’Umr, which means the Prolonged of Life. Yog-Sothoth wishes to enter this plane to feast on the life it contains, but only can do so at certain times. 
Yog-Sothoth can fly through our atmosphere at speeds of hundreds or thousands of miles per hour. Yog-Sothoth can transport one character per round any­where in the universe or anywhere in time by touching him. 
YOG-SOTHOTH, The All-In-One 
STR N/A CON 2000 SIZ varies INT 200 POW 500 DEX 5 HP 400 Damage Bonus: N/A Build: varies Magic Points: 100 Move: 100 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Uses following special attacks. Spheres: Each combat round, Yog-Sothoth may touch one charac­
ter with its slimy spheres and that character immediately loses 3D10 CON. This damage is permanent and will not heal nor­mally. It takes the form of corrosion, withering, or corruption of the body part touched, and may also involve an APP loss for the victim. 

Bolts: Alternatively, Yog-Sothoth may unleash bolts of silvery fluid or fire (at a cost of 1D6 magic points) which can reach over half a mile and destroy any normal objects struck—knocking down aircraft and slaying or stunning any or all humans failing to Dodge. A gout of energy covers an area about 5 yards across with its effect. 
Yog-Sothoth 

Spheres 100% (50/20), damage 3D10 permanent CON Bolts 80% (40/18), damage death in 5-yard diameter Armor: None, however only magical weapons may damage Yog-Sothoth. Spells: As many as it wants. Sanity Loss: 1D10/1D100 Sanity points to see it in spherical form. No cost to see Tawil at’Umr form. 
Zoth-Ommog 
A body shaped like a broad-based, truncated cone. A flat, blunt, wedge-shaped, vaguely reptilian head surmounts this conical torso, and the head is almost entirely hidden behind swirling tresses. This hair, or beard and mane, consists of thickly carved and coiling ropes, like serpents or worms … Through this repulsive Medusa-mane of ropy tendrils, two fierce, serpent-like eyes glare in a horrible intermingling of cold, inhuman mockery and what I can only describe as gloating menace. 
—Lin Carter, Zoth-Ommog 

It has a cone-shaped body with a lizard-like head. From the head grows a mass of thick serpent-like tentacles. From the base of the neck project four thick pseudopods resembling starfish arms, one on each side of the body. Zoth-Ommog is evidently buried underneath the Pacific in the corpse-city of R’lyeh. 
Cult 
Zoth-Ommog has no active cult among humans. Some deep ones may worship this malign entity. Zoth-Ommog can manifest itself through one of the many statues of itself scattered apparently randomly around the world. 
Zoth-Ommog, Son of Cthulhu 
STR 200 CON 600 SIZ 300 INT 100 POW 175 DEX 60 HP 90 Damage Bonus: +5D6 Build: 6 Magic Points: 35 Move: 25 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Can attack in a variety of ways using tentacles, 
feet, crushing blows, and so on. Generally it assaults any hu­man on sight, attacking either with one of its gigantic Fighting 90% (45/18), damage bonus Armor: 10-point thick, blubbery hide; regenerates 3 hit points per 

combat round. Spells: All Call and Contact spells, plus any that the Keeper finds 
appropriate. Sanity Loss: 1D6/1D20 Sanity points to see Zoth-Ommog. 
Section Three: Traditional Horrors 
One might easily imagine an alien nucleus of substance or 
energy, formless or otherwise, kept alive by imperceptible or 
immaterial subtractions from the life-force or bodily tissues 
and fluids of other more palpably living things into which it 
penetrates and with whose fabric it sometimes 
completely merges. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Shunned House 

Games of Call of Cthulhu can be used to tell any kind of horror story—don’t feel restricted to using authentically Lovecraftian adversaries. Traditional horror has often relied on the duality of good versus evil, a concept which loses its meaning in Lovecraft’s nihilistic universe. Many of the su­pernatural beings of legend are traditionally defeated with the use of religious paraphernalia: the vampire is harmed by holy water and repelled by a crucifix; ghosts and demons are subject to exorcism by Christian priests. Why should such things work in a Lovecraftian setting? Not everything needs to be explained, but glaring inconsistencies should be addressed; if vampires are affected by a crucifix, then why aren’t ghouls? 
Trying to marry the traditional horror tropes with a Lovecraftian universe might not be as easy as it sounds. It may be helpful to distinguish between games that use a Lovecraftian setting from generic horror games. 
Consistency is only required where two stories are linked. You may decide to have crucifixes burn the flesh of the undead in a 1970s vampire scenario only to have such things mocked and without value in a modern-day encoun­ter with the Mythos. If the stories are not linked (i.e. use a different set of characters) then no consistency is required. 
The use of traditional monsters within games also pro­vides Keepers with the option of inserting ‘red herrings’ into the story or ensuring that games don’t become stale as the investigators face yet another Mythos monster, week after week. Blending traditional and Mythos monsters allows Keepers to create unique and challenging mysteries where the players may think they know what they face, only to discover some new hybrid horror that is all the more chal­lenging and frightening. 
Ghosts 
Each ghost should be crafted by the Keeper to fit the cir­cumstances of the scenario. Ghosts generally possess only INT and POW, appearing as dim, misty forms. They haunt certain locations or specific objects (such as a book, ship or automobile). 
Ghosts may or may not be vulnerable to magic or to exorcism. Ghosts especially seem to haunt locations in order to communicate the awfulness that prompted their formation. Sometimes a ghost gives clues or instructions, which, if carried out, let the anxious shade dissolve and find peace. Though all ghosts are terrifying, some are more loathsome than others; a 1D8 Sanity point loss should be the maximum loss for seeing a ghost. 
Special Powers 
For a ghost’s attack, use an opposed POW roll. As this happens, the ghost may be glimpsed as clawing at, enveloping or otherwise physically attacking the target. 
If the character fails the opposed POW roll, the character loses 2D10 POW. If the character can over­come the ghost, he or she causes the ghost to lose 2D10 POW. Any points of POW lost are forfeit. Ghosts of greater strength may drain 3D10 POW or more from a victim in a single combat round, but such potent entities still lose only 2D10 POW if overcome by the victim in a particular round. 
It is up to the Keeper to determine how a ghost can be laid to rest. Some possibilities include: i Locating the source of attachment for the ghost and destroying it. 
i Locating the physical remains of the ghost and salt­ing and burning them. 
i Exorcising the ghost (this might include opposed POW rolls). 
i Enabling the ghost to fulfill its ‘mission’ (preventing the death of a loved one, resolving unfinished busi­ness, etc.) 
Some ghosts can manipulate the environment around them, causing pots to fly off shelves, doors to open and tele­phones to ring—the infamous poltergeist. More powerful poltergeists may cause physical harm to the unwary by attacking with thrown items. In such instances, investigators should use the Dodge skill to avoid being hit and perhaps look for alternative means to calm or expel the angry spirit. 
Individually crafted ghosts are good sources of spooky scenarios. Entire campaigns can be devoted to the study of and exorcism of ghosts. Books to read as sources for ideas about ghosts include The Haunting of Hill House (both the novel and the 1963 film, The Haunting) by Shirley Jackson, the Shining by Stephen King, any of William Hope Hodgson’s ghost stories (particularly the Carnacki the Ghost Finder tales), and the ghost stories of M. 
R. James. Henry James contributes a whole volume of ghost stories in his Collected Works and Rudy­ard Kipling set some excellent tales of ghosts in both England and India. 



Mummies 
These undead beings are similar to intelligent zombies. Some cults keep mummies in their tem­ples as guardians. Like zombies, mummies must be hacked apart to make them cease action. Contrary to popular belief, many mummies lack bandage 
wrappings and can move relatively swiftly. Some mummies cannot naturally regenerate magic points. A mummy has double its human STR, 1.5 times its original CON and two-thirds of original DEX. 
Because of the bitumen and bandages frequent­ly used to preserve them, fire is particularly effective against Egyptian mummies: damage is normal, however the flames are more difficult to extinguish 
because of the bitumen in the wrappings. 
MUMMIES, Husks of horror 

char. averages  rolls  
STR  105  (3D6 x10)  
CON  80  (3D6+2 x7.5)  
SIZ  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
INT  55  (3D6 x5)  
POW  75  (1D6+12 x5)  
DEX  35  (2D6 x5)  
HP: 14  

Average Damage Bonus: +1D6 Average Build: 2 Magic Points: 15 Move: 6 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: Mummies have the usual range of unarmed 
attacks open to humanoids. Fighting 70% (35/14), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 17% (8/3) 
Armor: 2-point skin. Impaling weapons have little effect (half 
damage). Skills: Stealth 50%. Sanity Loss: 1/1D8 Sanity points to see a mummy. 
Skeletons, human 
Animated skeletons are encountered in a few medieval legends and rather more frequently in stories and films. 
Special Powers 
Resistant to harm: Dried bones are fairly brittle, snapping and splintering easily from a heavy blow, however no area of a skeleton is more vulnerable than any other. Any blow striking a skeleton has a chance 
of destroying it equal to or less than the damage done x 5 (as rolled on 1D100). For example, if an axe hit a skeleton and did 8 points damage, there would be a 40% chance of destroying the skeleton by shattering it. Unless the skeleton shatters, it remains totally undamaged. 
Apply one penalty die on attacks made with an impaling weapon (including bullets), since much of the target is simply air. 

SKELETONS, The lovely bones Special Powers 
char. averages rolls Once physical attacks have exceeded its hit points, the STR 50 (3D6 x5) vampire turns into smoke or mist at the end of the CON N/A round after which its hit points reached zero, thereafter SIZ 65 (2D6+6 x5) regenerating hit points at the rate of 1 point per round. 
INT 50 (3D6 x5) 
If, when at zero hit points, a stake is driven through its 
POW 05 (05) 
heart the vampire is killed and reduced to ashes. 
DEX 50 (3D6 x5) HP: N/A (special rules apply) 
VAMPIRES, Blood-sucking freaks 
Average Damage Bonus: none 
char.averages rolls 
Average Build: 0 
STR 105 (3D6 x10)
Magic Points: 1 
CON 65 (2D6+6 x5)
Move: 7 
SIZ 50 (3D6 x5) ATTACKS INT 65 (2D6+6 x5) Attacks per round: 1 POW 65 (2D6+6 x5) Fighting attacks: Animated skeletons traditionally use DEX 50 (3D6 x5) 
weapons rather than striking blows directly, perhaps HP: 11 because they shatter so easily. Equip as desired, Average Damage Bonus: +1D4 typically a small club or sword. Average Build: 1 
Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D3 + damage bonus or weap­
on damage Dodge 30% (15/6) Armor: Resistant to harm (see special powers) Sanity Loss: 0/1D6 Sanity points to see an animated skeleton. 
Vampires 
Every player will be interested in matching wits with these bloodsuckers; however stories about vampires and their powers are so conflicting and contradictory that the in­dividual Keeper must determine which vampire facts are true in play and which are merely legendary. Here are some options: 
i A vampire casts no reflection. 
i A vampire may have to return to soil in which it originally was buried in order to pass the daylight hours. 
i The third bite from a vampire causes a character to die and then to become one of the undead. 
i A vampire has no special powers in daylight and may be unable to move abroad, or be unable to move from its coffin. 
i In Christian cultures, the cross gives pro­tection from a vampire, at least for a while, and holy water touching the thing sears and scalds its flesh. 
i The vampire is only affected by the religion it practiced or understood whilst alive. 
i A vampire never drinks or eats. 
i A vampire may not pass over running water. 
i A vampire can change into smoke, mist, a wolf or a bat at will. If smoke or mist, it drifts at the rate of one yard per round. 


Magic Points: 13 
Move: species rate +2 (human vampire MOV 10) 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 1 
Fighting attacks: Vampires have the usual range of unarmed at­tacks open to humanoids. 
Bite: Depending on the style of your vampire, the vampire may have to hold the victim to continue draining its victim’s blood, or the act of biting may subdue the victim to the vampire’s will. Either way the vampire drains 2D10 STR (blood) from the victim each round thereafter. 
Gaze: If the target fails an opposed POW roll the target is hypno­tized and can be made to follow simple instructions. If these instructions are self-destructive, at the start of a round the target’s player may attempt an INT roll to snap out of it. 
Fighting 50% (25/10), damage 1D4 + damage bonus or weapon 
Bite 50% (25/10), damage 1D4 + special (see above) 
Gaze Hypnotized, see above. 
Dodge: 25% (12/5) 
Armor: 0, but can reform after hit points are exceeded. 
Skills: Charm 60%, Human Psychology 60%, Track (Scent Blood) 75%, Stealth 70%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D4 Sanity points to be attacked; 1/1D3 to witness a transformation. Vampires of human appearance cost no Sanity points to see. 
Werewolves 
Traditionally, a normal human is cursed and occa­sionally thereafter turns into a monster, half-human and half-beast—classically at the full moon. This un­fortunate may be unaware of the curse or may detest his or her fate. The second sort may fully transform into a wolf, glorying in its transformations and has more control over the metamorphoses than the first. Ravenous and savage attacks, much like the classical 
mad dog or rabid human, are typical of both. Both types of werewolf apparently propagate by transmitting a transformational agent 
through the saliva while biting. In some cul­tures a person may become a werewolf due to witchcraft; the curse in this case being innocent. 
share common attacks, armor, 
for the perception in the mind character. 
Special Powers Regeneration: 
werewolf to injury, every round. Scars and welts of damage may remain after the 
human form. Such healing is weakening, often forcing the shape-changer to spend days in bed. 
Immunity: Werewolves are immune to most weapons, however they can be damaged or killed by fire or by silver weapons. Its fur set afire, the werewolf loses hit points faster than it can regenerate. Silver, the lunar metal, is poisonous to the werewolf. If the werewolf receives a major wound (half its hit point total or above in one wound) from a weapon made of silver the werewolf will die. If it takes a less than major wound from a silver weapon the werewolf may not regenerate hit points so lost. 
WEREWOLVES, Humanoid form 
char. averages rolls 
STR 105 (6D6 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ* 55 (3D6 x5) INT 20 (1D4+2 x5) POW 65 (2D6+6 x5) DEX 65 (2D6+6 x5) *Increase SIZ to 65 (3D6+1D3 x5) for a giant wolf form. HP: 12 Average Damage Bonus: +1D4 Average Build: 1 Magic Points: 13 Move: 12 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: Biting, clawing and mauling. If target’s 
skin broken by a Bite, the victim transforms into a werewolf at the next full moon. 
Fighting 50% (2510), damage 1D8 + damage bonus Dodge 32% (16/6) Armor: While in wolf or man-beast form, 1-point hide plus 
regeneration of 1 hit point per round. Skills: Track (by smell) 90%, Stealth 60% Sanity Loss: 0/1D8 Sanity points to see a werewolf. 
0/1D3 to see one change shape. 
 zombies, in the main, a few spells and zombies 
of resurrecting the  their faculties), and the new 

Werewolf 
ravener reassumes pollution might also create zombie-like things. 

ZOMBIES, The walking dead 
char. averages rolls 
STR 80 (3D6 x7.5) CON 80 (3D6 x7.5) SIZ* 65 (2D6+6 x5) POW 05 (05) DEX 35 (2D6) Hit Points: 14 Average Damage Bonus: 1D4 Average Build: 1 Magic Points: 1 Move: 6 (if shambling) / 8 (if non-shambling) 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 
Fighting 30% (15/6), damage 1D3 (or weapon damage) + damage bonus 
Dodge: Lacking volition, this is not an option 
Armor: Major wounds delivered to the body will result in loss of a limb. Otherwise ignore damage except to the head (one penalty die on rolls to target the head). 
Sanity Loss: 0/1D8 Sanity points to see a zombie. 
Section Four: Beasts 
A comprehensive guide to all the varieties of animals in the world is clearly beyond the scope of this book and would be quite unnecessary for play. The an­imals listed below are those that feature as foes in stories of the horror genre (think of Hitchcock’s The 
Birds) or those that might be utilized by the investi­gators (such as horses as mounts). 
Bat, Large 
The giant fruit bat of Central America congregates in doz­
ens or hundreds. The smaller bats common to the United States gather in enormous cavern-based flocks of up to 50,000 individuals. Bats worldwide are under severe environmental attack from humans. 


BAT, Large 
char. averages rolls 
STR 25 (2D4 x5) CON 35 (2D6 x5) SIZ 15 (2D4 x5) POW 35 (2D6 x5) DEX 105 (1D6+18 x5) If attacking as a group, use the characteristics above to represent 
the group, increasing the Size by 10 and damage dice size by 1 
for each additional bat. HP: 5 Average Damage Bonus: -2 Average Build: –2 Move: 1 / 12 flying 
Each time the target beats the bats in a Fight­ing roll reduce the number 
Fighting attacks (Group): 
Attacks with teeth and claws. 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 
Fighting 
Vampire Bat

of bats by one. Thus a group of 6 bats would have a size of 65 and would inflict 1D6 damage (since there isn’t a D7). 
Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D2 (+1 to dice size per extra bat in 
group) Dodge 52% (26/10) Armor: None. Skills: Spot Hidden (echo-locate) 75%. Habitat: Warm and temperate climates worldwide. 
Bird 
Common birds such as the magpie, crow and jackdaw offer no threat to humans normally, however in the horror genre these creatures sometimes turn in to foes. Use the values given for bats for an individual smaller bird. 
Larger birds may pose possible threats if so inclined. The statistics below provide for a giant eagle or any other large bird. Only the largest birds will attack humans, though vultures will attack helpless prey of any sort. All birds have the special ability to cut an attacker’s chance to hit in half (one penalty die to hit) while they are flying. 
Larger birds live in the higher hills and mountains, which offer safe nesting sites and reliable updrafts for soaring. They perch among pinnacles or on rocky ledges, or even in trees that have grown close enough to support the considerable weight of up to a half-dozen large birds and their nest. The range of such birds is effectively the western hemisphere, 

California Condor 

but no reason exists that a Keeper cannot say, “A giant bird is diving at you” anywhere this side of Antarctica, where the giant birds only walk. 
CONDOR, Vulture gryphus 
char. averages rolls 
STR 110 (3D6+12 x5) CON 50 (3D6 x5) SIZ 80 (3D6+6 x5) POW 65 (2D6+6 x5) DEX 95 (2D6+12 x5) HP: 13 Average Damage Bonus: +1D6 Average Build: 2 Move: 5 / 12 flying 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: 
Black Bear 

Dodge 47% (23/9) 
Armor: Skills: Habitat: 

America. 
Bear 

The Black bear is 
States. 

BEAR, BLACK 
char. averages rolls 
STR 100 (3D6+10 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 100 (3D6+10 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) HP: 16 Average Damage Bonus: +2D6 Average Build: 3 Move: 12 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: Large strong creatures with big paws, claws and 
teeth. Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 25% (12/5) Armor: 3-point fur and gristle. Skills: Climb 30%, Listen 75%, Scent Prey 70% Habitat: Southern Canada to Southern Mexico. 
Crocodile 
The Nile crocodile, now rare in the lower Nile but still found in central Africa, Madagascar, tropical Asia and northern water there may be crocodiles. Crocs eat anything they can catch and come in great numbers to a kill to feed communally. Usually they will not attack a boat. Similar stats may be used for any crocodilia, including alli­gators, caimans, and gavials—all long-snouted, lizard-like and carnivorous. 


CROCODILE, NILE 
char. averages rolls 
STR 130 (4D6+12 x5) CON 90 (3D6+8 x5) SIZ 130 (4D6+12 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 35 (2D6 x5) HP: 22 Average Damage Bonus: +2D6 Average Build: 3 Move: 6 / 8 swimming 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: The main danger of course is their bite, but a 
large one can thrash around and cause impact damage. 
Bite and hold (mnvr): Vicious jaws, once they have hold they are unlikely to let go and may drag their victim underwater to drown. 
Fighting 50% (25/10), damage bonus Bite and hold (mnvr) damage 1D10 + damage bonus, followed by damage bonus each round while held (or drowning) Dodge 17% (8/3) Armor: 2-point hide. Skills: Stealth 60% (in water 80%) Habitat: Tropics, especially jungle marshes worldwide. 
Dogs 
Our domestic friends are notable among animals for devo­tion and affection to their human masters. As hunters, they prefer to gather in packs of 1D8+3 animals minimum. 
Dogs come in a variety of sizes and the (average) values below should be adapted accordingly. 
DOGS 
char. averages rolls 
STR 35 (2D6 x5) CON 50 (3D6 x5) SIZ 35 (2D6 x5) POW 35 (2D6 x5) DEX 70 (4D6 x5) 

HP: 8 Average Damage Bonus: -1 Average Build: -1 Move: 12 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 
Fighting 50% (25/10), damage 1D6 Dodge 42% (21/8) Armor: N/A Skills: Listen 75%, Scent Something Interesting 90%. Habitat: Wherever humans live. 
Dog 

Horse 
Horses offer many advantages to those who know their ways. For roleplaying, divide them into riding horses, draught horses, donkeys and mules. 
Use of the riding horse is covered by the Ride skill. Single riders and small groups can easily cover forty miles in a day, given plenty of water and fodder such as oats and other grains. Riding horses may spar with other horses, but they do not fight unless cornered. Even cavalry-trained horses are trained merely to stay their ground and control their nervousness. Nearly all horses will panic at the presence of some supernatural thing. 
Draught horses are the largest of horses, usually broken to ride but not much ridden. To hitch them to wagons, a Drive Horses or similar roll might be asked. Saddles and girths large enough for them may not exist; bareback riding could be done with one penalty die to the Ride skill. 
Donkeys and mules mostly carry burdens, not riders, or draw wagons or carts. Stereotypically, they ignore com­mands when it pleases them, even brutal ones. 
Among all horses, the tendency concerning bloody events, gunfire, monsters, angry crowds and so on, will be a sensible one, to flee. 
HORSE 
char. averages rolls 
STR 140 (3D6+18 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 165 (6D6+12 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) HP: 23 Average Damage Bonus: +3D6 Average Build: 4 

Horse 

ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: These are large animals that can kick and bite 
as well as buffet a lesser opponent to the ground. Can rise up on its hind legs then plunge down with its forelegs. A horse requires training for it to trample people. 
Fighting 25% (12/5), damage 1D8 + damage bonus Dodge 25% (12/5), Armor: None. Habitat: Grasslands and high deserts, or where humans are. 
Lion 
Including lions (Panthera leo), tigers, mountain lions, pumas and cougars. The values for a Lion are listed below and can be used for all big cats with minor variations. A tiger is a little stronger whilst cheetahs are lighter and faster. 
LION  
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  95  (2D6+12 x5)  
CON  50  (3D6 x5)  
SIZ  80  (3D6+6 x5)  
POW  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
DEX  95  (2D6+12 x5)  
HP: 13  

Average Damage Bonus: +1D6 Average Build: 2 Move: 10 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 2 Fighting attacks: These dangerous predators have sharp claws and teeth. May use a Mnvr to wrestle and pin its opponent. 
Fighting: 60% (30/12), damage 2D6 + damage bonus Dodge 25% (12/5) Armor: 2-point fur and skin Skills: Stealth 30%, Track 25%. Habitat: Africa and Near East. 
Rat 
Individual rats are not worthy opponents; however an infes­tation of rats can be daunting. Assume ten rats per pack. A 
successful attack by an investigator kills one or two rats and usually chases away the rest of that pack. Rat packs exist only for the purposes of gaming. 
RAT PACK 
char. averages rolls 
STR 35 (1D6+4 x5) CON 55 (2D6+4 x5) SIZ 35 (1D6+4 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 70 (4D6 x5) HP: 9 Average Damage Bonus: -1 Average Build: -1 Move: 9 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Rats attack with teeth and claws. Overwhelm (mnvr): As a pack they may assault and overwhelm an 
individual using the Mnvr rules, because of their numbers they gain one bonus die on the attack. Such an attack would involve swarming over the target, biting and scratching as they do so. 
Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D3 Overwhelm (mnvr) damage 2D6 Dodge 42% (21/8) 
Armor: N/A Habitat: Not far from where you are sitting right now. 
Shark 
Sometimes that shark, he looks right into you. Right into your eyes. You know the thing about a shark, he's got...lifeless eyes, black eyes, like a doll's eye. When he comes at ya, doesn't seem to be livin'. Until he bites ya and those black eyes roll over white. And then, ah then you hear that terrible high pitch 
screamin' and the ocean turns red and spite of all the poundin' and the hollerin' they all come in and rip you to pieces. —Peter Benchley, Jaws 
Dangerous and feared through all the world’s oceans by humanity and sea-creatures alike, these predators have been called the perfect killing machine. These statistics are for a generic example shark, for a larger shark increase SIZ, STR and CON. 
The more common types of sharks are bull, great white and hammerhead, and these sharks vary greatly in size, temperament and appearance. Sharkskin is extremely tough and covered with tiny enamel “teeth’, and sharks are often hunted for their skin. 
SHARK 

char. averages rolls 
STR 90 (5D6 x5) CON 90 (5D6 x5) SIZ 90 (5D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 50 (3D6 x5) HP: 18 Average Damage Bonus: +1D6 Average Build: 2 Move: 12 swimming 

ATTACKS Attacks per round: 2 (can only grab and hold one victim) Fighting attacks: Biting, thrashing and slashing with its fins. Bite and Hold (mnvr): A shark may bite and hold on to its victim, 
inflicting automatic damage on following rounds until it can be dislodged by an opposed STR roll. Fighting 75% (37/15), damage 2D3 + half damage bonus Bite and hold (mnvr) damage 2D6 + damage bonus for each round 
held Dodge 25% (12/5) Armor: 5-point tough skin. 
Skills: Sense Life 95%. Habitat: Oceans, down to 2000-3000 meters. 
Snake 
Broadly falling in to two categories; constrictors and ven­omous. The former use their attack to grapple and constrict their prey (use the Mnvr rules), the latter using their attack to bite. 
SNAKE, CONSTRICTOR, Pythons and other giant snakes 
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  110  (3D6+12 x5)  
CON  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
SIZ  70  (4D6 x5)  
POW  50  (3D6 x5)  
DEX  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
HP: 13  

Average Damage Bonus: +1D6 Average Build: 2 Move: 6 
ATTACKS 
Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Can bite, but mostly rely on crushing their prey. Constrict (mnvr): Seeks to wrap around it’s prey, thereafter 
crushing then swallowing the victim whole. With a successful attack the victim is at a disadvantage thereafter (penalty die) and automatic damage is applied each round unless the snake is killed or dislodged by an opposed STR roll. 
Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D3 Constrict (mnvr) damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 25% (12/5) 
Armor: 2-point glistening skin Skills: Stealth 90% Habitat: Tropical forests. 

SNAKE, VENOMOUS, cobra, adder, etc. 
char. averages rolls 
STR 35 (2D6 x5) CON 35 (2D6 x5) SIZ 15 (1D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 90 (5D6 x5) HP: 5 Average Damage Bonus: -2 Average Build: -2 Move: 8 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 (can use Bite to fight-back numerous times per round) 
Fighting attacks: Bite. The toxicity of snake venom can vary. Victims must make an Extreme CON roll to resist full effect of the poison. A successful roll indicates a lesser effect. Unless antivenin or suitable medical treatment can be found within a few hours, the victim of a bite may die (see Poisons page @@). 
Fighting 40% (20/8), damage 1D4 + damage bonus + poison Dodge 42% (21/8) Armor: N/A Skills: Stealth 90%. Habitat: Tropical forests. 
Squid, Giant 
The average size of the species is a body about twelve feet long, with tentacles up to an additional sixty feet in length. The statistics reflect a squid of this size. To make a whale-battler, add 3D10 of SIZ and STR for every two feet of increased span from tentacle tip to tip. 
SQUID, GIANT 
char. averages rolls 
STR 105 (6D6 x5) CON 65 (2D6+6 x5) SIZ 105 (6D6 x5) POW 50 (3D6 x5) DEX 95 (2D6+12 x5) HP: 17 Average Damage Bonus: +2D6 Average Build: 3 Move: 4 / 10 swimming 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 4 Fighting attacks: Thrashing tentacles bash anything nearby. It will 
use maneuvers to seize and bite its prey. 

Seize (mnvr): Can seize a victim with one of its eight tentacles. The first tentacle striking a foe hangs on; when a second connects, the two constrict the target and each does its damage each round. 
Bite: Once seized by a tentacle the victim may be bitten by the crea­ture’s poisonous beak. Victims must make an Extreme CON roll to resist the full effect of the poison (see Poison page @@). If not resisted the poison causes 1D6 damage and a penalty die on all future actions for several hours. 
Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 + damage bonus Seize (mnvr) damage 1D6 per round + held Bite (must be seized) 45% (22/9), damage 1D10 + poison Dodge 47% (23/9) 
Armor: 2-point hide Skills: Stealth 70%. Habitat: Deep oceans, preferably cool polar waters. 
Wasp and Bee Swarms 
A cloud of stinger-equipped, flying insects attacks for 2D6 combat rounds before halting pursuit. Unless the victims are completely covered (as with netting or by being enclosed in an automobile or by diving underwater), there is no protec­tion against them. An investigator who is stung extensively and whose player fails a CON roll may experience profound immune system shock, fall seriously ill, and (rarely) die. 
The Africanized bees presently colonizing the Americas are more intent in their pursuit than are honey bees or wasps, attacking for up to 3D6 minutes. Being seriously stung by these so-called killer bees occasionally results in death, since the attacks are comparatively unrelenting and often more numerous. Each minute of such attack might cost as much as 1D6 hit points. 

Wolf 
They may hunt in packs when dogging herds of elk or cari­bou; they as often hunt singly or in family pairings. 
Wolves are normally shy and verified attacks on healthy humans are said to be rare or non-existent. 
WOLF  
char.  averages  rolls  
STR  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
CON  50  (3D6 x5)  
SIZ  40  (2D6+1 x5  
POW  50  (3D6 x5)  
DEX  65  (2D6+6 x5)  
HP: 9  

Average Damage Bonus: none Average Build: 0 Move: 12 
ATTACKS Attacks per round: 1 Fighting attacks: Teeth, claws and mauling. 
Fighting 50% (25/10), damage 1D8 + damage bonus Dodge 32% (16/6) Armor: 1-point fur 
Skills: Track (by smell) 90%, Spot Hidden 60% 
Habitat: Approximately the same ranges as larger cold and tem­perate climate ruminants and herbivores. 
Optional Rules 
An Optional Structure for the Cthulhu Mythos 
Lovecraft wrote many wonderful stories, but each of them stood alone rather than being part of a cohesive whole. There were of course some common named elements with­in his stories, certain places, characters, books, gods and so forth, but when one looks closely these are rarely repeated or developed. The stronger commonality is less tangible; a certain feel and atmosphere that Lovecraft sought to capture in his ‘weird tales’. The repeated story elements are more easily latched on to, and form the body of what has become known as the Cthulhu Mythos. 
Real world myths have inconsistencies and contra­dictions, and this is also true of the Cthulhu Mythos. It is these very inconsistencies and contradictions that make the Cthulhu Mythos such fertile ground for others to cultivate their own story-seeds. As Keeper you should feel empowered to make your own decisions, using the various entities, dei­ties, tomes and so on as building blocks to create your own unique stories. The Cthulhu Mythos is meant to be beyond man’s understanding, so for this book to attempt to define it too closely may prove counterproductive for the reader. 
Some have tried to define a pantheon of Mythos gods or to classify them in to a hierarchy of elder gods, other gods, outer gods, great old ones and so on. These differing classifications of the Mythos entities are not set in stone and provided merely as a guide for those who might prefer a more definite structure. 
Outer Gods, Elder Gods, Other Gods 
Depending on which author one reads, the universe is ruled by beings variously known as the Elder Gods, Outer Gods, or Other Gods. Only a few of these deities are known by name. The majority are both blind and idiotic. They are all extremely powerful alien beings and some may be of extra-cosmic origin. 
The Outer Gods rule the universe and have little to do with humanity, except for Nyarlathotep. Humans meddling with these entities suffer for it, usually ending up mad or dead. Names for a few Outer Gods are known. They appear almost to be true gods, as opposed to the alien horror of the Great Old Ones, and some may personify some cosmic principle. Only a few of these deities seem to take interest in human affairs or to acknowledge the existence of the human race. When they do, they often are shown trying to break through cosmic walls or dimensions in order to wreak new destruction. All the races and lesser deities of the Mythos acknowledge the Outer Gods and many worship them. 
The Outer Gods are controlled, or at least represented, to some extent by their messenger and soul, Nyarlathotep. When the Outer Gods are discomforted, Nyarlathotep investigates. Azathoth, the daemon sultan and ruler of the cosmos, writhes mindlessly to the piping of a demon flute at the center of the universe. Yog-Sothoth, either a second-in-command or co-ruler, is coterminous with all time and space, but locked somehow outside the mundane universe. Yog-Sothoth can be summoned to this side only through the use of mighty spells, whereas Azathoth theoret­ically might be met by traveling far enough through space. A group of Outer Gods and their servitors dance slowly around Azathoth, but none are named. 
The Outer Gods include: Abhoth, Azathoth, Daoloth, The Lesser Other Gods, Nyarlathotep, Shub-Nig­gurath, Tulzscha, Ubbo Sathla, Yibb-Tstll and Yog-Sothoth. 
The Elder Gods are not a Lovecraftian convention; later writers (such as Au­gust Derleth) coined the term and many consider them a poorly-judged addition to the Mythos as they suggest the concepts of good and evil—terms that have little or no meaning when considering the actions, purpose and ideologies of cosmic, alien gods. Derleth posited that the Elder Gods somehow oppose the Outer Gods and the Great Old Ones are in fact the cause of the catastrophe that brought about the imprisonment of the Great Old Ones. 
The Elder Gods include: Bast, Hypnos and Nodens. 
Outer and Elder Gods sometimes have been lumped together and confusingly called the Other Gods, though pri­marily gods of the outer planets and not of our Earth. They would seem seldom called here, but when they do appear they are second to nothing in horror. (And, just to thor­oughly confuse you, a set of minor Outer Gods are known collectively as the Lesser Other Gods!) Species associated with these deities (shantaks, hunting horrors, servitors of the Outer Gods, dark young of Shub-Niggurath) are corre­spondingly rare on Earth. 
The Great Old Ones 
They are not as supernatural as the Outer Gods, but are nonetheless god-like and terrible to human senses. Humans are much more likely to worship Great Old Ones, who are comparatively near at hand and who occasionally partici­pate in human affairs or contact individual humans, than they are to worship Outer Gods. Entire clans or cults may secretly worship a Great Old One. Lone madmen, on the other hand, seem to prefer the Outer Gods. Beings serving the Great Old Ones frequently inhabit the remote fastness of the Earth. Investigators most often encounter their wor­shipers and alien servants. 


The Great Old Ones themselves appear to be immensely powerful alien beings with supernatural-seeming abilities, but not to be true gods in the sense that the Outer Gods are reported. Each Great Old One is independent of the rest and many seem to be temporarily imprisoned in some way. 
It is said that “when the stars are right” the Great Old Ones can plunge from world to world. When the stars are not right, they cannot live. “Cannot live” need not mean death, as the famous couplet from the Necro­
nomicon suggests. 
That is not dead which can eternal lie, And with strange aeons even death may die. 
Cthulhu, the most 
famous creation of Love­
craft, is a Great Old One. 
With the rest of his race, 
he sleeps in a vast tomb at 
the bottom of the Pacific 
Ocean. Cthulhu seems 
to be the most important 
Great Old One on Earth. 
Others of differing forms exist 
and they are recorded as being 
both less powerful and more free. 
Ithaqua the Windwalker roams at 
will across Earth’s arctic latitudes. Hastur 

the Unspeakable dwells near Aldebaran and Cthugha near Fomalhaut. Other Great Old Ones doubtless infest other worlds and it may be common for a world to be ruled by dominant Great Old Ones. All those known on Earth are invoked or worshiped by humans but, by the evidence of the stories, Cthulhu is worshiped more than the rest put together. Minor Great Old Ones such as Quachil Uttaus usually have no worshipers, however wizards may know spells to summon them. Such entities fill the role of demons within the hierarchy of the Mythos. 
Interventions by Great Old Ones in human affairs are isolated. Some commentators suspect that these greater beings rarely think about human beings or take them into account. Humanity is negligible and unimportant. 
The Great Old Ones include: Atlach-Nacha, Chaugnar Faugn, Cthugha, Cthulhu, Cyaegha, Eihort, Ghatanothoa, Gla'aki, Hastur, Ithaqua, Nyogtha, Quachil Uttaus, Rhan-Tegoth, Shudde M’ell, Tsathoggua, Y’golonac, Yig, Zhar and Zoth-Ommog. 

Servitor Races 
Particular species are often associated with particular Great Old Ones or Outer Gods—byakhee with Hastur, for instance, or nightgaunts with Nodens. These are servitor species, and frequently an Outer God or Great Old One manifests accompanied by several such servitors. Representatives may act as assassins, messengers, spies and delivery boys, fright­ening off investigators and bulking out confrontations. In comparison, Outer Gods and Great Old Ones should be met with exceedingly infrequently. 
The list of servitor races includes: Byakhee, Dark Young of Shub-Niggurath, Deep Ones, Fire Vampires, Servants of Gla'aki, Star-Spawn of Cthulhu, Formless Spawn, Hunting Horrors, Nightgaunts, Rat-Things, Sand-Dwellers, Servitors of the Outer Gods, Shantaks, Spawn of Ubbo-Sathla and Tcho-Tchos. 
Independent Races 
Other alien species are also important, and sometimes have been able to hold their own against Great Old Ones. The independent races vary in power, and some are extinct. They are intimately connected with our planet, as described in At the Mountains of Madness and The Shadow Out of Time. In these stories Lovecraft gives the true history of the Earth. Some species, such as dholes or flying polyps, make no association with particular gods or else, as with elder things and the Great Race, take no special interest in magic. Whether one is greater or lesser seems to depend on the relative danger posed by the average individual. 
At the dawn of the Cambrian age, beings known only as the elder things flew to the Earth. They inhabited much of the land, warred with other species, and finally were pushed back to Antarctica. The elder things, perhaps mistakenly, bred organisms eventually to evolve into the dinosaurs, mammals, and humanity. They also bred the horrible shog­goths, whose ultimate revolt led to the near-extinction of the elder things. 
Aeons ago, indigenous cone-shaped beings had their minds taken over by the Great Race of Yith, mental beings from the stars. The Great Race survived in their adopted bodies until about 50 million years ago, when they were de­feated by terrible flying polyps not native to this Earth, which the Great Race had imprisoned in vast caverns beneath the surface. However, the Great Race had already transmitted their minds forward in time to escape their doom. 
The star-spawn of Cthulhu came down upon the Earth and conquered a vast reach of land in the primordial Pacific Ocean, but were trapped when it sank beneath the surface. The beings referred to as the fungi from Yuggoth (or mi­go) established their first bases on the Earth in the Jurassic period, about a hundred million years ago. They gradually reduced their bases to the tops of certain mountains, where they maintain mining colonies and such. 
At present, humans share the planet with deep ones and ghouls (which seem related to humanity in some fashion), and with a handful of mi-go. Other species occasionally visit Earth, or are sleeping, or are dormant. 
The list of independent Races includes: Chthonians, Co­lours Out of Space, Dholes, Dimensional Shamblers, Elder Things, Flying Polyps, Ghasts, Ghouls, Gnoph-Keh, Great Race of Yith, New Great Race, Gugs, Hounds of Tindalos, Lloigor, Mi-go, Moon-Beasts, Serpent People, Insects from Shaggai, Shoggoths, Star Vampires and Beings from Xicotl. 



We shall swim out to that brooding reef in the sea and dive down through black abysses to Cyclopean and ma­ny-columned Y'ha-nthlei, and in that lair of the Deep Ones we shall dwell amidst wonder and glory for ever. 
—H.P. Lovecraft, The Shadow Over Innsmouth 



he daughter of a local industrialist has been kidnapped. The ransom payoff went horribly wrong, ending in a gunfight on the edge of the Green Mountain National Forest. The kidnappers have escaped the scene with both the girl and the ransom money, and fled back into the forest. 
The investigators must rescue the girl, hunt the criminals down, and bring them to justice. However, there’s more to be discovered in the forest than anyone ever guessed… 
Introduction 
Amidst the Ancient Trees takes place in the summer of 1925 in Southwest Vermont, though Keepers may relocate the ad­venture’s setting and change the period to suit their gaming group. 
The investigators are in Bennington, Vermont and sign-up to join the search party for the criminals and the kidnapped girl. The scenario assumes that players will cre­ate investigators specifically for this adventure and includes suggestions for getting the investigators involved. If the adventure is to be run as part of an ongoing campaign, the investigators are free to bring their own reasons for signing up for the search party. 
This scenario emphasizes action over investigation. How­ever, there are opportunities for investigations to take place at the beginning of the adventure. The Keeper may wish to make the players aware of this beforehand if creating charac­ters solely for this scenario, to prevent selecting skill sets that will see little use. The most useful skills will be Tracking, Spot Hidden, Listen, Stealth, Fighting, and Firearms. 
While the period would suggest that male investigators would join the search posse, there is no reason why female characters cannot do so. 
The Keeper is advised to read the descriptions of both Gla'aki and the servants of Gla'aki in Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods. 
Background 
Millennia ago, the Great Old One known as Gla'aki came to the Earth in a crystal prison upon a meteor. Caught by Earth’s gravitational field, the meteor was pulled off course and broke apart as it sped further towards Earth. Shards of the meteor and the crystal prison landed across the globe. One of the lesser splinters came to rest in North America. Though scattered, the crystal prison still has power over the Great Old One. Gla'aki is confined to this planet as long as the prison’s power remains intact. 
Over the ensuing millennia, Gla'aki has been seeking out these shards and projecting itself to other bodies of water near where the shards of crystal have fallen. From these des­olate places it sends out its Dream Call to lure inhabitants of the surrounding lands to it and, exerting itself, it manifests there for a brief time to convert them into undead servants. These servants are used to cement the hold of Gla'aki in these territories and ultimately find the shards of the crystal prison nearby. Once found and brought to the lake, Gla'aki can destroy the power within the shards. With every piece of the crystal it destroys, the weaker the prison becomes. One day Gla'aki will be able to finally escape the prison and travel unrestrained once more. 
In 1865, Joseph Turner and his gang of friends were con­scripted into the Union Army. Terrified of meeting their end on the battlefield, the gang decided to desert and flee north to the Canadian border and wait out the war. 
Turner and his gang fled into what would later become the Green Mountain National Forest, where they could hide from the authorities on their trek north. Here, north of the small village of Somerset, Vermont, they encountered something far more terrible than the war they were escaping from. In the middle of the virgin wilderness, Turner and his men set up camp on the shores of a lake less than a mile from where one of the shards of the crystal prison had come to rest. That night, they heard the Dream Call of Gla'aki. With the promise of eternal life they walked into the black waters with open arms. Here, Gla'aki took Turner and his men and raised them up as its undying servants. 
Over the last 60 years, Turner and the other servants have been slowly digging through the woods looking for the buried crystal. Now they have found it, buried deep in the ground. Very soon they will have accomplished their task and Gla'aki will take one step closer to freedom. 
Recent Events 
Summer, 1925, diggers and surveyors working on the foun­dations for the new Somerset reservoir (named after the old village that is now a small logging community) found traces of odd mineral deposits—the remains of the meteor that fell to Earth millennia ago, comprised of an unknown mineral. 
The deposits have defied analysis and have caused Lu­cas Strong, the new head of the Vermont Water Board and former owner of a successful local logging firm, a major headache. While the initial research says that these materials are probably not toxic, Strong is not prepared to take the risk—he would not survive the scandal if word got out that he knew the site contained potentially harmful compounds that could contaminate the water supply. With the vast majority of the Water Board’s budget tied-up in the land, moving the reservoir to another location is simply not an option. 
Facing potential ruin, Strong has decided to take steps to ensure he has done everything possible to remove the threat of potential toxicity by sending a team of surveyors and geologists into the forest to track down other deposits remaining in the area of the drainage basin and remove them. Having been seen to have done everything humanly possible, Strong believes he can face down any potential for scandal. However, there’s just one small snag… 
Word of mouth began to circulate that Strong had sent a surveying team out into the forest to look for ‘precious met­als’. While technically accurate, when those words reached the ears of a small time crook named Sidney Harris, he translated ‘precious metals’ into ‘gold’, and Strong became a target for extortion. 
Harris and his gang kidnapped Strong’s sixteen-year­old daughter, Jane, taking her deep into the forest to hold her captive in an old hunting lodge. All was going to plan until Harris and his men began to experience the dreams of Gla'aki calling to them to join with it in the lake. The dreams set the men on edge, making them anxious and paranoid. When the time came for the hand-over of the ransom money, the gang panicked and a gunfight with the authorities ensued. After gunning down several cops, Harris (who managed to grab the bag containing the ransom mon­ey) and one other wounded survivor (Eugene Clayton) fled back into the forest. Harris’ plan is to head back to the cabin where Jane is being held. From there maybe he can make a run for the Canadian border with Dobbs and Clayton. 
Meanwhile, Strong’s team were conducting their survey. Unfortunately for them, they strayed a little too close to Gla'aki’s lake and fell fully under its control, joining the Turner gang as undead servants. With more undead man­power, as well as the team’s modern equipment, the goal of unearthing the crystal and delivering it to their god in the lake is within sight. 


Dramatis Personae 
Lucas Strong: Local bigwig and father to the kidnapped girl. 
Jane Strong: Kidnapped girl, age 16. 
Kidnappers: A 3-man team; Eugene Clayton, Sidney Harris and Christopher Dobbs. 
Strong’s Survey team: James Stanton, Dean Walters, Carl White and Richard Gibson. Sent to look for mineral depos­its. Have become servants of Gla'aki. 
Hunters: Brian and Arthur Hall, Alistair and George Law­son (two father and son teams); innocent hunters lost in the forest, caught up in events they do not understand. 
Artists: A group of artists on a field trip, camping in the woods. They are assaulted by, and destined to join, the ser­vants of Gla'aki. 
Servants of Gla'aki: Joseph Turner and his gang of civil war deserters (August, Jacob, Vincent and Louis). Deep in the forest they seek to sacrifice innocent people to Gla'aki and unearth a buried crystal. 
The Thing in the Lake: A manifestation of the great old one, Gla'aki, which seeks to use its influence to lead its servants to seek out and destroy a fragment of its crystal prison. 
Timeline of Events 
This is a timeline of the major events, granting the Keeper a frame of reference if players forge their own path through the scenario. 
Day 0: Friday, June 19th 1925 
Kidnappers: After the firefight on the edge of the forest, Sid­ney Harris runs back into the forest with Eugene Clayton. The two of them don't get far that night and take refuge in one of the many deserted cabins throughout the forest. 
Servants of Gla'aki: Towards the end of the night, in the forest near the lake, the servants of Gla'aki raid the Artists’ camp, having been told by their god that there are intruders in the nearby area. 
Artists and Hunters: The artists, along with two hunters (Brian and Arthur Hall), are captured, taken to the dig site by the servants of Gla'aki and locked in Hut 4 to await their conversion. One of the artists escapes, and though fatally wounded, begins to make his way back towards Bennington to seek help. 
Day 1: Saturday, June 20th 1925 
Investigators: Play starts with the investigators arriving at the town meeting. 
Kidnappers: Sidney Harris makes it over halfway back to the hideout where Dobbs holds the girl. Eugene Clayton is injured, covering only half the distance Harris is able to, and that night shoots at one of the wandering servants of Gla'aki. 
Servants of Gla'aki: During the night, the servants of Gla'aki raid the hideout where Jane Strong is held, Christopher Dobbs, who is holding her, is killed in the confrontation. They take her to their camp and put her with the other prisoners. 
Artists: Most are now captive or dead; however, one has managed to flee and finally collapses from blood loss, dying not far from wherever the investigators have camped for the night. 
Day 2: Sunday, June 21st 1925 
Kidnappers: Sidney Harris reaches the hideout in the late afternoon to find the girl gone. He beds down there, with the plan of setting off the next morning for the Canadian border. That night the servants of Gla'aki assault the hide­out; however Harris uses his gun to keep them at bay. 
Servants of Gla'aki: Conduct the largest blast (which the investigators will witness from afar), which finally frees the crystal shard. They will begin lifting it tomorrow. The servants go back to the hideout to collect Harris. 
The artists: The servants of Gla'aki take the five artists down to the edge of the lake to be converted (Jane Strong and two other captives are held at the dig site). 
Day 3: Monday, June 22nd 1925 
The artists: Down by the lakeside, slowly being converted in to servants of Gla'aki. 
Kidnappers: Now insane, Harris has barricaded himself into his cabin. He remains there until the investigators find him. 
Servants of Gla'aki: The newer servants are working at the dig-site. 
Investigators: This is where the investigators are most likely to alter the course of events. If undead workers are not stopped, the crystal is pulled out of the pit just after sun­down and taken to the lake. The newly converted prisoners are untied and return to the dig-site to collect the remaining prisoners for conversion. 
The Thing in the lake: If the crystal is delivered to the lake, the Great Old One has achieved its goal in the forest. 
Investigator Motivations 
When running Amidst the Ancient Trees as a standalone adventure it is recommended that the investigators have motivations to join the posse formed to track down Harris. These motivations work best when tied into the scenario background, but could be more generic. 
Presented below are some optional investigator motiva­tions, which can either be handed-out randomly during investigator creation or discussed with the players, allowing them to shape the motivations more closely with their char­acter concepts. The players may be encouraged to follow their motivations with a promise of a Sanity point reward at the end of the scenario if all goes well. 
These motivations are purely optional. Players should not feel obliged to use them if they don’t believe they fit their character concepts. 
Suggested Investigator Motivations: 
One 
You’ve gotten yourself into a dire financial situation. Debts to the bank, the mortgage company, and so on. In your des­peration you turned to a loan shark. You have until the end of the week to get the cash or the loan shark will start break­ing bones. All you need is $1000 and you’re in the clear… 
Keeper note: Mr. Strong, funding the posse with his own money, is offering $25 per day for everyone involved. It won’t take many days to find Harris, so the player can try to barter for more pay or to get another investigator’s share. There’s also the option of the ransom that Harris ran off with. Strong wants it back, but the desperate investigator could always try to snatch it. 
Two 
John, your brother, used to work for Lucas Strong and his water company. He used to tell you about how much of a miser Strong was. The man wouldn’t give you a dime if your life depended on it. Your brother got fired just because he wanted to save a few bucks. He did nothing wrong and it’s just damned unfair. Now that something’s happened to his daughter, he’s throwing cash around that could have kept your brother in his job. It’s time to do what’s right… 
Keeper note: This is potentially one of the darker moti­vations and is open for the player to interpret. Some possible interpretations: try to extort more cash from Strong; try to get the brother his job back; the player might even kidnap Jane and use her as leverage over Strong, etc. This could lead to some interesting intra-party conflicts if the player pushes in the wrong direction at the wrong time. 
Three 
You used to work for Lucas Strong until you messed up. Sure it was your mistake, but people make mistakes. One misun­derstanding with a client and you were fired. Since then you have survived on makeshift work, although money is tight. 

Now Strong really needs someone to get his daughter back. You’re the right person for the job. All you need to do is show him what you can do and he’ll take you back and your worries will be over. 
Keeper note: In this instance, the investigator could try to take charge of the posse, becoming the ‘team leader’. Rather than a monetary reward, the investigator might seek to be reinstated in his or her job. This might even involve attempts to influence any testimony Jane gives if she is res­cued. 
Four 
You and Sidney Harris and his gang go way back. You grew up together but you weren’t friends. Harris used to make your life a misery. Once a bully, always a bully… You’ve made good for yourself since then and Harris is down in the gutter. Now it’s you who gets to come out on top. This is your chance to get revenge on him, acting in the name of the law… 
Keeper: note This could be interpreted either as captur­ing Harris and getting him back to town to face justice, or as motivation for personal revenge. 
Investigator motivations could be dealt randomly to the players. You may wish to create additional moti­vations if you have more than four players. Randomly issuing motivations like these is a technique that you may choose to use in future scenarios. A reward of 1D6 points of Sanity is also offered as an incentive to the players. A little addition like this goes a long way towards kick-starting the game and inspiring some unforeseeable outcomes. 

Day 1: Briefing 
Read the boxed text out loud to the players: The scenario begins at 10.00am with the investigators attending the briefing at the Police Station. Sheriff Jenkins explains the background to what’s happened: 

G Sidney Harris and his gang have kidnapped Jane Strong, daughter of Lucas Strong. 
G Harris demanded a ransom of $10,000 for Jane’s return and a hand-over was arranged for last night at the edge of town. 
G All seemed to be going smoothly until Harris and his men got twitchy and lead started flying. Chaos ensued with both sides shooting it out. 
G After shooting two police officers, Harris and one other member of his gang got away with the ransom money. 
G The escapees have fled back into the forest, where they are believed to be holding Jane. 
G Lucas Strong is in attendance and adds that he is personally offering the $25 per day to anyone who joins the hunt. He adds that he would consider it a “real kindness” if Harris’ dead body was also brought back. He reiterates the message on the posters seen around town, that he’s willing to pay anyone who is willing to help, “Man or woman, black or white, I don’t care. Just bring my little girl home and you’ll be paid!” 
If the investigators wish to question the sheriff or Strong further they may do so, although both know little more than what’s already been said. If the investigators press Strong for more money or make a scene, the sheriff will take objection and warn the investigators to mind their manners. 
The volunteers are then grouped together, with the investigators placed in the same team. They are given until noon (two hours) in which to get their supplies and equip­ment together. 
Investigators wishing to buy additional weapons or equipment may do so from Arthur J. Spence’s Hardware and Gun Store on Main Street (refer to equipment lists on pages @@-@@). 
Should the investigators go looking for unusual equip­ment then Luck rolls may be called for. Remember that this is essentially a frontier town and so some items will be impossible to buy in the time the investigators have. 
Anyone wanting to work out the route that Harris is using might look to the local library or newspaper office. Both carry an archive of the Bennington Banner. There are numerous articles going back to the Civil War (no Library Use required) about the forest being used as a hideout for fugitives trying to evade conscription into the Union Army. Many are believed to have fled to the Canadian border. More recent articles describe Strong’s plan for the reservoir and the fact that he has recently sent out a geological team to survey for precious minerals in what will become the reservoir’s bed. 
Investigators may also try to pick up information by word of mouth (such as at the hardware and gun store). 
It’s common knowledge that hunting parties often venture out in to the forest and hunters return with plenty of good stories. One thing that stands out is that none of the hunters like to stay out in the forest for long and none of them ven­ture too far into the heart of the wood as there is “less game to be found there.” Additionally, the investigators may hear of a group of artists from the city who have recently headed into forest. No one seems to know who the artists are or what they are doing. 
Investigators wishing to pick up any more information by word of mouth may also hear stories from the more supersti­tious townsfolk concerning odd events in the woods over the years. Such tales might weave fantasies of Indian burial grounds (a red herring), an ancient buried evil (potentially alluding to the presence of Gla'aki, but also foreshadowing the buried crys­tal), and ghosts of Civil War deserters that roam throughout the night (specifically including the name of Joseph Turner). 
The Keeper is encouraged to use rumors to drop subtle hints about what dangers might await the investiga­tors. The players will be wondering what they are fac­ing and hints will fuel their imaginations. Take note of any speculation the players make; sometimes they will think of things that are more frightening than those in the scenario! Always be ready to incorporate some of these ideas later. Alternatively you might respond to something a player says in the voice of a non-player character, “What’s that sonny? You talkin’ ‘bout ghosts? I done seen one, one time when I was out a fishin’ by the lake…” 
Keepers are encouraged to let the investigators hear various rumors relating to Strong’s wayward daughter, his financial and business dealings, and the strange goings on in the forest. 
By noon, the various groups of volunteers who comprise the posse have gathered in the town square. The sheriff di­rects each group to a general area of the forest in which to focus their search. The idea is that the individual groups will form a noose that gradually tightens towards the center of the forest. The investigator’s group is told to take a north­easterly route and follow that line to beyond the boundary of what will become the reservoir. 
The investigators are amongst the first groups to be shown to their starting point: the scene of the shoot-out of the previous night. The site is a newly formed clearing about a hundred yards across on the edge of the forest, forming part of a wider area marked for logging. A dirt track from the main road heads over a small field to the edge of the clearing. It is littered with short stumps and a couple of piles of fallen tree-trunks, surrounded by tall, looming trees that stand close together. Scattered over the site is evidence of the events of the previous night: discarded shotgun shells and bullet casings; bullet holes in the trees and stumps; and 

The Briefing 
a couple of heavy bloodstains where the police officers were gunned down. The area is otherwise still and ominously quiet. From here, the investigators are directed to head northeast. 
Evidence of two men running into the forest is quickly discovered by anyone searching the area. These are the tracks left by Sidney Harris and Eugene Clayton. 
As the characters set off from the edge of the woods, you may begin to call for Tracking rolls to find the direction the kidnappers took. If the players constant­ly fail the tracking rolls the investigators progress will be slow and hazardous. Feel free to incorporate some of the negative outcomes listed in the section Pushing skill rolls in the forest (see page @@). Ultimately the investigators must find the tracks otherwise there will be no scenario. Successful tracking rolls should pro­vide a slight advantage to the players, allowing them to anticipate encounters rather than being surprised or disadvantaged by them. 
Day 1: Meeting the Hunting Party 
For the first few hours of trekking through the forest all the investigators will see is the occasional glimpse of deer running between the thickets. 
At this point, ask each player to describe how their inves­tigator is dressed, if they have not done so already. If none of them have specifically made the choice to wear brightly colored clothing that makes them stand out from their sur­roundings, call for Listen rolls. Those succeeding hear the sound of wood breaking up ahead. 

Anyone who made the Listen roll may also attempt a Spot Hidden roll to spot a pair of people with rifles ahead of them on the trail. Those who failed the Listen roll may attempt a Hard Spot Hidden roll (needing equal to or under half their skill to succeed). The pair, a man and a boy, are both carrying rifles and packs. 
If the hunters aren’t seen or heard, their presence will be­come known when the investigators hear gunshots ahead. If any of the investigators are wearing brightly cultured cloth­ing then there are no gunshots, as they are not mistaken for potential game, and the man and boy walk forward, making their presence known in a much more friendly manner. 
If the investigators spot the hunting party before the shots are taken, contact can be made by waving or crying a “hello,” otherwise ask the investigators to make a group Luck roll (see Luck, page @@). A failed group Luck roll means that a random investigator has been mistaken for a wild animal at a distance and shot at by the hunters for 1D3 damage—the bullet scoring a glancing hit. Such damage manifests as a flesh wound rather than a serious injury. No­tice that there is no need to roll to hit—this was a random incident and the damage is a result of the failed Luck roll. 
The resulting scream and possible gunfire back will bring cries of “DON’T SHOOT!” from the hunting party, who are as scared as hell and very apologetic. 
The hunting party comprises Alistair Lawson and his 14-year-old son, George, who came from Boston on a camp­ing trip with their neighbors, Brian Hall and his 12-year-old son, Arthur, to teach their boys to how to hunt. They are completely unaware of the manhunt and haven’t heard any­thing odd in the area—besides the occasional rumbling of a truck up on the trail heading north towards the reservoir dig site. They’ve only been out three days and haven’t ventured far into the forest. 
Brian and Arthur Hall went deeper into the forest a couple of days back and haven’t been seen since. The Law­sons have been keeping to the edge of the forest to look for deer, plus (Alistair says quietly) George was getting scared at night, so they pulled back to the wood’s edge. 
If the investigators talk to George about being scared, he will say that both he and his dad were having bad dreams. He doesn’t remember what they were about. Both son and father are reluctant to say more, however if pressed, Alistair says that he kept dreaming he was drowning. 
They agree that they won’t get in the posse’s way and urge for them to look out for Brian and Arthur. “You can’t miss Brian. He’s got a big ol’ Texan hat he brought with him to keep out of the sun.” Alistair also mentions that they came across a group of artists camping out in the woods quite some way into the forest. “They said they were from back home as well, from the University of Boston. They’re working on some assignment. Painting the wildlife and landscapes, they said. We bumped into them a few days ago and they said if we passed back that way to drop in for some coffee. Keep an eye out for them. I hope they don’t get caught up in all this.” 

Day 1: The First Night 
Finding a clearing in which to set up camp is relatively easy this far in to the forest. The investigators can bed down for the night without issue, though the Keeper should imply that danger is ever present. 
Given the impending recovery of the crystal, Gla'aki’s attention is focused on its existing servants and thus is not actively calling the investigators to become new servants. However, all within the forest are subject to the psychic dis­turbance caused by Gla'aki’s presence, manifested through bad dreams. 
During the night call for POW rolls. Those that pass have uninterrupted sleep and suffer no ill effects. Those failing the POW roll are susceptible to Gla'aki’s Dream Call and should be given a randomly selected Dream Call Hand­out (see page @@). Where noted on the handout, call for a Sanity roll for each investigator affected (applying the Sanity point loss as noted). Keep note of which player has received which handout. Reflect upon the investigator’s backstories and consider weaving some aspect of an investigator’s back­story in to their dream. 
Whoever is awake around midnight may attempt a Listen roll. Success means that the in­vestigator can make out the faint sound of a truck engine in the far distance somewhere ahead, but they can see no lights. On another occasion they will hear a flurry of rifle fire, but too far away to pinpoint. The gunfire is Eugene Clayton shooting at one of the passing undead servants (see Day 2: The first kidnapper, page @@). 
If the investigators decide to move onwards after hearing the sound of rifle fire in the middle of the night, call for Hard CON rolls. Those that fail the CON roll simply can’t go on as exhaustion takes over. The investigators are unlikely to locate Eugene that night. If they do wander far, the Keeper may choose to have another encounter that night, either Day 2: The artist’s body (see page @@) or Day 2: The truck (see page @@). 
Day 2: Moving Through the Forest 
The next day, the posse are entering the heart of the forest. Strangely, there are fewer signs or sounds of animals this far in. 
Day 2: The Artist’s Body 
As the posse continue on through the forest, call for Tracking and Spot Hidden rolls. Those suc­ceeding with Spot Hidden discover blood-spatters across their path upon the ground. Those who pass Tracking rolls notice that the foliage has been disturbed, with broken twigs and branches that imply someone was running while injured 
through here recently. 
If they choose to follow the trail, it detours away from their intended path, but not enough that they can’t double back later. 
A half-mile down the trail a discarded hunting knife is found. It is old, rusty, and covered in sticky, semi-dried blood. A little way farther from this lies the body of one of the artists who escaped the raid on their camp (see Day 3: The artists’ camp, page @@). Seeing the torn-up corpse costs 0/1D3 SAN for those not accustomed to the sight of death. 
The male body doesn’t have any identification; however, the overall he is wearing is flecked with paint. There is a (knife) wound to his side that he’s attempted to bandage poorly. Medicine or First Aid rolls will determine he bled out steadily for the last day or so before finally collapsing. 
The investigators should decide whether to follow the trail made by the dead man back to its origin or to put that aside for now and continue hunting Harris. 
Those deciding to follow the dead man’s tracks will need to make a Tracking roll and spend the rest of the day searching to find the artists’ camp (see Day 3: The artists’ camp, page @@). It is at the Keeper’s discretion whether the investigators encounter the remaining events of Day 2 (see 


Pushing Skill Rolls in the Forest 
If the investigators are not willing to give up after hav­ing failed a skill roll, they may persevere. Remember that it is up to the players to explain what actions their investigator is taking, and for you as Keeper do decide if a pushed roll is warranted. 
The consequence of failing a pushed roll should always be derived from the situation. Here are a few suggestions for consequences of failing pushed rolls in the forest: 
The investigators inadvertently stumble upon a lone black bear (see Bear, Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods, page @@) and rile it with their appearance. After inflicting some damage on the investigators, the bear flees. 
Another posse hears the investigators pass by their camp and take potshots at them, believing them to be the kidnappers. This could run very much like Meeting the hunting party (see page @@). 
The investigators set up camp or take a rest break in the clearing. It is actually the road used by the truck (see Day 2: The truck page @@). Perhaps the group doze off and are awoken as the truck is almost upon them. Ask for DEX rolls to clear their equipment from the path of the truck. 
A wandering servant of Gla'aki spies the investiga­tors and an assault is planned. 
Something important is lost by an investigator. Perhaps a rifle, propped against tree and forgotten. 
The forest is full of hazards. An investigator might fall, be bitten by a snake or insect, suffer bad blisters, and so on. 

Day 2: The truck and Day 2: The first kidnapper) before or after they come upon the camp. 
Day 2: The Truck 
The posse stumbles across a trail of tire tracks that have cut through the forest floor. Given it’s snaking roughly north­east, a successful Navigation roll can plot that the track is heading into the area north of Somerset. Anyone with local knowledge knows there are nothing but trees and the occa­sional small lake there. 
Shortly afterwards, the posse hears the distant sound of an engine (the same as that possibly heard by those on watch the night before). James Stanton is the truck’s driver. He’s one of the engineers from Strong’s survey team and 
The Artist's Body 

has recently become a servant of Gla'aki. He is still human in appearance, though he has a terrible wound in his chest (where one of Gla'aki’s spines was inserted), which he has concealed under his coat. He’s a little distant and hostile to anyone blocking his way, looking at them sternly and de­manding they get off the trail. Don’t play him as a mindless zombie, but he should feel cold and lacking in emotion. 
Stanton will object to the posse trying to search the truck but won’t actively try to stop them. There are no fugitives within, but there are several crates of dynamite. He explains that he’s on the geological survey being headed up by Carl White, under the direction of Mr. Strong. 
Stanton claims to know nothing about the kidnapping, however is interested to hear that there might be people around their camp, so he will keep an eye out for them. He won’t take the investigators to the dig site/base camp, but will say that it would be fine to visit them, “Just follow the road and it will get you there eventually.” Unless prevented, he then drives off. 
Day 2: The First Kidnapper 
A little before dusk, call for Hard Spot Hidden rolls. Those succeeding catch the glint of light off Eugene Clayton’s rifle-scope from his vantage point on a ridge up ahead. A group Luck roll determines if Eugene has spotted the inves­tigators approaching. 
If he has spotted them, Eugene will fire a shot over their heads in an effort to scare them off. He only has three shots left after this, having used most of his ammunition the pre­vious night shooting in the darkness at the passing undead servant. See Eugene’s profile in the non-player characters section, page @@) If he hasn’t spotted them, the investiga­tors may attempt to make Stealth rolls to attempt to get the drop on him. 
The investigators can take cover easily once the warning shot has been fired, but getting to the kidnapper without being shot would require a successful Stealth roll. A failed roll will leave an investigator exposed and possibly a target. Any investigator trying to flee the area will not be a target for Eugene. 
Any investigators who are caught out in the open trying to make a full-frontal assault on Eugene leave him no choice: he will try to shoot them dead. However, given he is badly injured after being shot by the police two nights ago, all his combat rolls are made with a penalty die (see page @@). 
If the investigators manage to advance far enough, or if he runs out of ammunition, Eugene will try to flee rather than stand and fight. A chase may ensue, although Eugene’s rolls should be at a penalty due to his injuries (see Chapter 
7:Chases). If he escapes, the Keeper should decide when he will reappear. Potentially, the investigators could encounter him again at any point, either following his tracks and catching him exhausted after a successful Tracking roll, or perhaps during a later event as he makes his way towards the hideout. 
If caught or cornered at gunpoint, Eugene will surren­der, demanding that the posse take him back to the town to get medical attention. Eugene is suffering from a fever, wounded from the shootout (blasted by a police shotgun), and claims he’s delirious—he states he took a pot shot at someone he saw last night and he swears he hit, but the figure just walked off! 
 Eugene will say anything to pin the kidnapping (and any other crimes he thinks he’ll be blamed for) on Harris, claiming he was bullied into it. If questioned about Jane Strong, he will say that she was looked after and was healthy when he last saw her before the shoot-out. He will provide directions to the hideout cabin in which she is held. 
The investigators have the option to follow Eugene’s directions or pick up Harris’ tracks again. 
Day 2: The Second Night 
The investigators have travelled far into the heart of the forest now and are now much closer to where Gla'aki dwells, its inhuman thoughts drifting on the winds of dream. 
All investigators will experience Gla'aki’s Dream Call on this night (regardless of whether they have previously experienced it). Each investigator randomly selects a Dream Call Handout (see page @@), excluding “A Restless Night” from this selection. The Keeper should call for Sanity rolls for the relevant dreams (applying the SAN loss as noted on each handout). 
Ask those on guard duty to make an Extreme Spot Hidden roll (requiring the player to roll equal to or below one-fifth of their skill). If the roll is failed, the investigator concerned gets the impression of being watched. Those who succeed notice something moving in the darkness. 
The watcher in the dark is one of Gla'aki’s undead servants (Louis—one of Turner’s gang, see non-player 

Chasing the Kidnapper Through the Forest 
The series of locations that make up this chase will all be forest-based, for example: 
G Steep muddy slope, requiring a Climb roll. 
G Brook, requiring a Jump roll. 
G An area thick with young trees, requiring a DEX roll to weave rapidly through. 
If Eugene gains a lead of three locations you may wish to ask for Spot Hidden rolls to keep him in view, or Tracking rolls to follow his trail. 

characters on page @@), patrolling the woods after the other servants have been alerted to the fact that there are a lot of people out in the woods at the moment who could disrupt their mission. If left alone, Louis will slink back to­ward the dig site to report to Turner. If followed, the undead monstrosity will conduct a swift attack to cause as much confusion as possible, aiming to disappear into the forest. 
If cornered, Louis doesn’t want to risk a fight to the death, so will wait until he receives a blow of reasonable force to make it look feasible for him to play dead; as he is a walking corpse, it succeeds automatically. When left alone or with only minimal attention being paid to him, Louis will escape into the darkness. 
At midnight, everyone will be awoken by an explosion somewhere in the distance to the north. This is the survey team blowing the rocks free from the crystal monolith. Even though the echo of the blast dies away quickly, a faint blue light can be seen lingering, reflected off the base of the clouds for a few moments. 
Not long after, there’s a rustling ahead (Listen roll to detect the noise in advance) and another posse team appears out of the darkness. They have had enough of the forest and the bad dreams—although, unless pressed, they will claim that they are just tired and sick, having eaten some bad meat (Psychology roll to detect that they are lying). They are heading back to town. 
Day 3: Moving Through the Forest 
The investigators are near the lake and thus begin to feel and see the effects of Gla'aki’s Dream Call. The forest canopy grows thick, leaving the investigators walking in a dim half­light where the trees appear twisted in pain, and the color of the undergrowth is unnaturally pale-sickly yellow. Call for Listen rolls, with those succeeding realizing that there is no sound of wildlife at all (Sanity roll, 0/1 SAN loss). 
Day 3: The Artists’ Camp 
The artists’ camp is not far from the trail used by the trucks heading to the dig site. The campfire has long since died, the tents are broken and there are signs of a struggle or fight. Turner and his gang came in the dead of night, taking the artists to the lake as an offering to their god (converting them into new servants, see Day 3: The lake, page @@). 
One of the six artists staying there managed to escape the attack, but not before being badly wounded. This is the unfortunate whom the investigators have already found dead (see Day 2: The artist’s body, page @@). 
There are four sleeping tents, two of which look they have been home to a man and woman, with only single occupants in the other two. There are two other, larger tents. One of these is a large communal tent, apparently used for cooking, although the stove is long since cold. The last tent is also comparatively large and seems to be have been used as a painting studio. Easels lie broken, paint and brushes appear crushed and canvases litter the floor. 

A search of the sleeping tents reveals a notebook, various art pads, and some partly completed oil canvases. In addition, a Spot Hidden roll reveals a discarded rifle and Texan hat in a nearby bush, next to drag marks heading northwards (in the direction of the dig site). This should remind the investigators of Alistair Lawson’s parting words to them from Day 1: Meet­ing the hunting party (see page @@) about Brian Hall. 
Looking through the notebook reveals that the artists are from Boston and that they came here to paint for their art course. The latest entries describe frightening dreams (uncannily similar to those the investigators are experienc­ing), and how they met Brian and Arthur Hall, who claim to have been experiencing the same dreams. 
The art pads and canvases show a range of paintings, mostly of landscapes and woodland scenes: G An owl perched on a branch, peering out into the dark twilight. 
G A deer looking through the trees in an otherwise deserted wood. 
G The moon shining down through the trees above. 
G A path snaking its way through the trees, the ground covered in dead, yellow leaves. [DREAM] 


The paintings found at the Artists' camp. 

G A dilapidated old cabin, the door open and the dark outline of a figure within. [DREAM] 
G A figure seen from behind, looking out onto the black waters as something horrible rises up out of the lake. [DREAM] 
If an investigator has already experienced something similar to one of the paintings in a dream, the player con­cerned should make a Sanity roll, losing the same amount as originally prompted by the dream. Apply the usual rule here to limit cumulative loss from one source. Thus if the SAN loss for the particular dream is 1D6, the maximum that can be lost for having the dream and then seeing the painting is a total of 6 Sanity points. 
The investigators may be following Eugene’s direction or Harris’ tracks. Alternatively they might track the artists’ attackers towards the lake. 
Day 3: The Hideout 
In a clearing stands an old cabin. The door is closed and there’s no sign of movement. 
As the investigators enter the clearing, they detect the smell of death. The stench comes from a blood-soaked tree, where impaled through the chest on a branch halfway up is Christopher Dobbs—the member of the gang left to guard the girl. Call for Sanity rolls, with 0/1D4 SAN loss due to the gruesome nature of the death. 
The cabin is shot through with many bullet holes. If investigated further, it appears the bullets were fired from within. 
Distracted by the discovery of the body, the investigators are most likely unaware that Harris is alive within the cabin. When he hears the investigators, he will open fire from inside the cabin with his shotgun (take note that shotgun damage is decreased with range, and that shotgun attacks do not impale). He yells, “Give her back or get the hell away!” He is crazy from the Dream Call of Gla'aki and has been fending off undead servants throughout the night. Unless the inves­tigators can incapacitate or calm him (Extreme Persuade, Charm or Intimidate roll), he will continue shooting, fearing the investigators are more of the horrors come to get him. 
If the investigators manage to pacify Harris, he will explain that the girl is gone. He found Dobbs dead the previous evening, and he was attacked in the night (by the servants). Once he has said this, he will collapse into hysteria. 
Day 3: Turner’s Cabin 

Heading back to the tracks through the forest, the posse finds it divides in two. One road looks recently used, the other less so. Freshly fallen leaves lie on the forest floor, an event that shouldn’t happen until the Fall. Anyone who has experienced the Dream Call handout "A Path Through the Forest" will recognize the lesser-used road as part of the path from their dream (Sanity roll, 0/1 SAN loss). If they advance down the recently used track, go to Day 3: The dig site (see page @@). 
If they advance down the older, less used track, they come upon a clearing to the left where another, older cabin resides: Turner’s cabin. This is instantly familiar to anyone who has experienced the Dream Call handout "A Cabin in Darkness" as being the cabin from their dream (Sanity roll, 1/1D6 SAN loss, as the horror of the initial dream is relived in their mind). The trail continues past the clearing as well, to Day 3: The lake (see page @@). 

What the investigators find inside Turner's Cabin. 
Inside, there are Civil War Union army uniforms and hats hung upon pegs, bloodstained hunting knives on the table, and long dead animals hanging from hooks in the ceiling. There is no evidence of cooking. An old Civil War­era rifle stands in one corner. It has not been maintained; its mechanism is rusted and jammed. 
A Spot Hidden roll reveals a pale-blue light creeping up from the gaps in the floorboards. A trapdoor can be found, which leads down to an earthen basement. The pale-blue light emanates from a set of five blue stone caskets that the undead servants use to sleep in during the day, shielding themselves from the harmful sunlight (they can take cover elsewhere but prefer these caskets). These caskets are a gift from their god, one that it bestows to its servants. 
During the day, two of Turner’s gang (August and Ja­cob), lie in their caskets. The other caskets are unoccupied but do contain a few items: 
G Trinkets belonging to the members of Turner’s gang, dating back to the days of the Civil War: lockets with the pictures of loved ones, long since dead; rings or other jewelry of the same period. 
G One of Gla'aki’s spines. It is a glistening, metallic, sharp spine that appears to have been snapped off at one end. A hollow tubular channel runs throughout the center of its length. All relevant Science rolls are unable to identify the metal. It is not a metal of Earthly origin (Sanity roll, 0/1 SAN loss for those who make their Science (Chemistry or Biology) roll). 
G A diary, with the name of Joseph Turner inscribed inside the front cover, which details his backstory(see page @@). Most of it is in fairly untidy handwriting and will take some time to be read. However, flicking through the book, the investigators can get a general idea of the events from occasional readable lines. 
G Some small traces of the green dust-like decay is still present, having fallen from the servants while inside. Science (Biology or Botany) rolls are unable to dis­cern exactly what this substance is beyond possibly being some kind of decaying fungus or mold. 

The Keeper is encouraged to relay the information found in the diary verbally to build atmosphere. There is no handout presented here, allowing the Keeper to control how much information the investigators get from the diary about the events leading up to their transformation into un­dead servants—reveal as little or as much as you wish. Only the last, most important passage of the diary is presented below to be read aloud to the investigators: 

Otherwise, at night, the caskets are all partially open and empty as the servants are all at the dig site. 
If August or Jacob are present and their caskets are dis­covered, they emerge and attempt to win the investigators to their cause. They avoid combat, as they are vulnerable during the day, instead promoting the benefits of the eter­nal life that awaits them. Gla'aki’s undead servants are not mindless; they are cunning and aim to entice the investiga­tors to the lake once it grows dark. 
If the investigators start a fight or attempt to leave, August and Jacob will attack and try to incapacitate them before placing them in the empty caskets. Here, they will be imprisoned, awaiting the cover of darkness when they can be taken to the lake to be converted. Once their prisoners are secure, they return to their own caskets to wait till nightfall. 
Even with three caskets unoccupied, there is still plenty of room for the investigators, since each one is large enough to squeeze two people inside. Once trapped inside, the blue light provides limited illumination. The lid is firmly sealed in place when it slides shut, not just by the physical weight of the lid, but by the magical properties invested in it by Gla'aki. Opening a casket requires a Hard STR or POW roll, whichever is lowest. If successful, the lid can be opened from the inside or outside. If this roll is Pushed, a suggested consequence of failure is that the character passes out or has a Dream-vision sent from Gla'aki. 
Given that they won’t leave Turner’s cabin during the day, August and Jacob won’t pursue the investigators beyond the threshold should they flee the cabin. They will wait for the cover of darkness to begin any pursuit. 
Day 3: The Lake 
Following the older trail further still, it comes to the edge of the black and stagnant lake that the investigators have seen in their dreams. Here, the five surviving artists have been strapped to poles about five meters in from the shore of the lake. In the evening of Day 2 they were bought here and offered to Gla'aki, who rose from the lake and pierced each one in the chest with a two-foot, metallic spine; blood and viscera cover the unfortunate painters. Call for Sanity rolls, with 1/1D6 SAN loss. Each artist should be dead, however if the investigators get close enough they realize that they are still moving—triggering another Sanity roll, with 1/1D4 SAN loss. 
Despite their minds being broken by their experiences, the artists will relay their story if the investigators untie them. Read aloud or paraphrase the following: 
Removing the spines from their chests frees them from their pain and they each die with a scream that may well attract attention. Call for a group Luck roll. Failure means that James Stanton and Dean Walters come from the nearby dig site to investigate. 
If the investigators stay to watch what happens then they need to make Stealth rolls to avoid detection. The undead servants will attempt to overpower the investigators and drag them to the hut (see Capturing the investigators) if they spot them. If the investigators removed spines from any of the captives, the servants will carelessly discard the corps­es and tie any captured investigators to the vacant poles. Escaping these bonds requires an Hard STR or DEX roll. If the roll is failed, the player may Push the roll. Remember the player must justify the pushed roll. One consequence of failure might be that the investigator rocks the pole so much that it falls over, landing the investigator face down in the water. Alternatively they pass out and awaken at night as Gla'aki appears… 
If they are still bound there when night falls, Turner and his gang come to the lake to call forth Gla'aki and offer up the investigators as undying servants. If any of the artists were not liberated by the investigators they will rise as un­dead servants at midnight. 
Day 3: The Dig Site 
How this scene unfolds is dependent on the actions of the investigators; whether they march blindly into the dig site or take a more cautious approach (see A more cautious investigators are able to make out a few huts and a clearing from which comes the sound of machinery. 

If the investigators are not hostile, Richard will be sur­prisingly civil and welcoming, although will not allow them access into the site. Remember that while Richard is an undead servant he can still pass for human—he’s still pretty ‘fresh’. He will explain that this is a work site where they are conducting blasting and not safe for members of the public. 
The investigators may attempt Fast Talk, Persuade, Charm or Intimidate rolls. Failure means that they are turned away. If they Push the roll and fail, time is wasted and other undead servants arrive, leading to a possible confron­tation. Success means Richard will take them to Carl White, the site foreman. 
Inside the Dig Site 
The dig site comprises five temporary huts around the edge of a clearing. In the center of the clearing is a blast crater leading to the hole that contains the crystal. 
James Stanton, Dean Walters, and Carl White make their way back and forth from the hole to the furthest hut (the storage hut), where they are taking ropes and tools to attach to the crystal to pull it to the surface. At night they are assisted by Turner and his gang. 

The first hut is the foreman’s office. There are geological survey maps of the woods on display, with numerous places marked (suspected sites of mineral deposits), as well as basic laboratory equipment. Should the investigators get the chance to look through the paperwork in here, they will dis­cover that certain mineral deposits have been found which defy analysis and that the team have been sent to recover all deposits in the water drainage basin to prevent possible contamination of the reservoir. 
The second of the five huts provides sleeping quarters for the team, containing what minimal possessions they have brought with them. 
The third hut is a kitchen and mess hall (not used of late). 

The fourth hut has the windows boarded up and is sim­ply marked as "storage". This hut is used to hold prisoners. 
The fifth hut, at the far end, is marked as a "tool shed", containing drilling equipment and other tools, such as dy­namite. 
Carl’s Explanation and Entrapment 
If the investigators gain access, they may be introduced to Carl White, who is pleasant enough to the investigators at 

The Dig Site 

first and suggests that they step into his office. Given that he and his team have only recently been converted to Gla'aki’s cause, they don’t suffer the harmful effects of exposure to sunlight, but it’s still a hot summer day out there all the same, so shade is preferable for a long conversation. 
Carl is willing to give the investigators a sanitized ver­sion of what the team is doing. He explains (honestly) that they have been sent into the woods to conduct geological surveys. He doesn’t say that they are looking for mineral deposits that could contaminate the reservoir’s water sup­ply. He explains that they have found evidence of a potential deposit of platinum at this site—hence the deep blasting. They haven’t found any yet, but they are hopeful that they will soon. 
If the posse are not satisfied by his answers, Carl will offer to show them around the rest of the site, but will avoid showing them inside the hole and the crystal monolith they are trying to blast free. This is all a ruse, designed to lead the investigators into a trap. 
Capturing the Investigators 
Carl will eventually lead the investigators to the fourth hut, and the other servants begin to casually make their way over to assist him in the capture. Carl invites the investigators in to show them some of the mineral samples that have been uncovered. 
The interior is dark, but with the front door open there is enough light to see inside. Carl takes the investigators to a side room where the bound prisoners (Jane Strong, Brian and Arthur Hall) are being kept. Meanwhile, the servants shut the door to blot out the light (as they can see perfectly well in the dark) and rush the investigators, attempting to restrain and capture them. 
Turner, Vincent and Louis (if he was not dispatched earlier) are in the adjoining room, sheltering from the sun, and will come to assist at the sound of conflict. Turner may use the Dominate spell (see page @@) to ensure the investi­gators are bound without issue. 
In any case, the gloves are off at this point and the ser­vants can’t allow the investigators to leave. If overcome, the investigators will be locked in the dark hut until nightfall, when they will be taken down to the water to become slaves to Turner’s god. 
The Other Prisoners and their Guards 
If captured, the investigators might talk to the other pris­oners: 
Jane: She was taken from the hideout in the dead of night where she had been kept hostage by the Harris gang. Then "dead men" walked in and killed her captor by impaling him on the side of the tree. 
Brian and Arthur: They were on their way back out of the woods when they met the artists and decided to stay for the night. They saw the paintings and realized that they were all having the same dreams. Brian is badly shaken up and confused; he overheard his captives talking. One said he would, "Become one with their new god." They took the 
The Crystal 

artists away and they have not returned. Arthur, the boy, simply rocks back and forth, crying. 
The servants will be keeping guard and can make an appearance as the Keeper wishes. They don’t want to harm their captives before nightfall if they can help it. 
Escape 
If the investigators have been taken captive, the bonds holding them will be secure; it could take a while to work themselves free. The investigators can make Hard DEX rolls, whether they try to free their own bonds or help another investigator. This roll may be Pushed, with the consequence of failure being attracting the servants’ attention. 
Any servants in the next room can hear everything the investigators say if louder than a whisper. They will intervene if they hear anything suspicious. A successful Stealth roll will allow investigators (once free of their bonds) to move across the room to the door without being heard. The door leads to the main room of the hut where the servants stand guard. 
Ultimately, how it plays out from here is down to the Keeper. Some points to bear in mind are what the time was when the investigators entered the hut and how long they have till sundown—given the time needed to break free. Then there is the matter of Turner and his gang in the next room. If the prisoners are found to have broken free, they won’t have any hesitation using force to subdue them. If they break free into the daylight, it’s down to Carl and the survey team to stop them, as Turner and his men won’t pursue in daylight. Escaping from the site will result in a hunt to the death, as the undead servants can’t run the risk of the investigators escaping when they are so close to completing their goal. 
If the investigators don’t manage to break free they are taken down to the lake when night falls to be converted to undying servants; see The lake (see page @@). 
A More Cautious Approach 
Wise investigators may watch the site for a while and get a better idea of what is going on. Over the course of the re­maining day, they will see the undead servants (all except Turner and his men—they wait till dark in the hut) walking purposefully around the site, carrying tools and ropes to the pit. From within the pit they can hear the sound of working and, by sunset, the servants will have built an elaborate pulley system above the pit that snakes from the site to edge of the nearby lake. Soon after, as night falls, the workers, assisted by Turner and his crew, begin to operate the pulley, using the truck to pull out a pale blue-colored crystal. It almost seems as if there is a source of light shining deep within the crystal. 
If the investigators don’t intervene, the workers will drag the crystal to the lake and call forth Gla'aki, who rises from the waters, grasps the crystal and begins to drain the power from it. The crystal shines with a bright blue light (as seen the previous night, after the explosion) that becomes pain­ful to watch after a few seconds. With a flash, the light finally dies and Gla'aki thrashes in the water. With a bellowing roar, it sinks slowly beneath the waves and the undead servants return to the dig site, full of pleasure for having fulfilled the dreams of their god. Investigators witnessing this should make appropriate Sanity rolls for seeing Gla'aki. 
They will collect their prisoners and head to the lake to convert them before they join their god in the depths of the black waters. 
The investigators could wait until nightfall and use the cover of darkness (although most likely being unaware of the fact that darkness does not impede the undead servants) and the distraction of the undead workers with the crystal, to free the prisoners. 
Likewise, there are plenty of tools, including dynamite, lying about the site. If the investigators can destroy the pul­ley and/or smash the crystal (it can be reduced to smaller pieces, but never destroyed) then they will also prevent or delay Gla'aki’s attempts to retrieve it and drain the power from it. Killing the undead workers would also undermine Gla'aki’s ability to act. 
Should the investigators leave and go for help, upon their return, they find the whole site blown apart by the remainder of the dynamite. The huts are burnt down, the lake is still, and only a pattern of shambling footsteps in the mud (going below the water level) remain. 
Conclusions 
If its undead servants were successful, Gla'aki has taken one small step towards freedom. Many crystal shards are left around the world for it to drain before it can finally be free again. It’s a long road, but one that has been made a little shorter. 
If the investigators were aware that the prisoners were being held on the site but were unable to save them, they each suffer 1/1D6 Sanity loss. 

If Jane Strong is rescued and Gla'aki thwarted, each investigator that fulfills his or her motivation (if motivation handouts were given out at the start of the game) receives a 1D6 SAN reward. 
If the prisoners were saved, the investigators gain 1D6 Sanity points, in addition to the reward money. They are local celebrities and receive glowing write-ups in the Ben­nington Banner. 

A Note on Lethality 
This scenario, and in particular the final confrontation, is designed for a group of investigators new to Call of Cthulhu. As such, the lethality is relatively low. 
However, for those Keepers who wish to up the ante, consider giving the servants of Gla'aki some Civil War period weaponry. Having deserted from the Union army, they may not have left unarmed. As the rifle in Turner’s cabin suggests, they might well have some other guns elsewhere that work. As such, this can turn into a firefight between the servants and the investigators. 


Non-Player Characters 
Where groups of non-player characters are listed, the same values may be used for each of them, however the Keeper may vary the statistics as they wish. 
Joseph Turner and his gang, Undead Servants of Gla'aki 
Turner and his gang arrived here in 1865, avoiding conscrip­tion into the Union army. They were converted to servants of Gla'aki and have been here ever since. They are more monster than human now. 
The Turner gang consists of Turner plus four others; August, Jacob, Vincent and Louis. Use the entries given for servants of Gla'aki in Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods. 
The servants have weaknesses and can be destroyed. If exposed to sunlight, Turner and his gang should have one penalty applied to all their actions per hour of exposure. Only spending time spent in the blue stone caskets can alleviate the spread of the green decay. After three hours of constant sunlight their bodies disintegrate forever. 
Turner has been especially blessed by Gla'aki and is a little more powerful than the average Servant. 
JOSEPH TURNER, Favored undead servant of Gla'aki 
STR 70  CON 120  SIZ 80  INT 65  POW 75  
DEX 55  APP 0  EDU 0  SAN 0  HP 20  
Damage bonus: +1D4  
Build: 1  
Magic Points: 15  
Move: 7  
Attacks per round: 1  

Fighting attacks: Turner has the usual range of unarmed attacks open to humanoids and is armed with a knife. Fighting (Brawl) 50% (25/10) damage 1D3 + damage bonus or 
Knife (damage 1D6 + 1 + damage bonus) Dodge 15% (7/3) Spells: Dominate, Wither Limb, Create Barrier of Naach-Tith (if 
Turner is desperate he may take refuge somewhere, perhaps with the crystal, and use this spell to keep the investigators at bay). 
Skills: Stealth 55% Sanity Loss: 1/1D8 sanity points to see Turner. 
AUGUST, JACOB, VINCENT & LOUIS, Turner’s gang, Ser­vants of Gla'aki 
They appear as horribly decayed humans. For convenience, use the standard values for a Servant of Gla'aki (see Chapter 
14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods) or you may wish to draw up unique values for each. Keepers looking to increase the lethality of the servants presented are encouraged to increase the Gang’s CON and DEX levels. 
Each is armed with a knife or similar tool. Sanity Loss: 1/1D8 sanity points to see August, Jacob, Louis and Vincent. 
Strong’s Survey Team, Servants of Gla'aki 
Carl, James, Dean and Richard have recently been made into undead servants of Gla'aki. They still appear human. Use the standard values for a Servant of Gla'aki (see Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods) or you may wish to draw up unique values for each. 
Each is armed with a knife or similar tool. Sanity Loss: None to see these seemingly human servants, though if inspected more closely 1/1D8. 
SIDNEY HARRIS & EUGENE CLAYTON, kidnappers on the run 
While identical stats are listed for both, the Keeper should personalize these two through the way they are portrayed. STR 70 CON 65 SIZ 65 INT 50 POW 50 DEX 62 APP 50 EDU 55 SAN 48 HP 13 Damage bonus: +1D4 
Build: 1 Move: 8 Fighting (Brawl) 40% (20/8) damage 1D3 + damage bonus 
Dodge 31% (15/6) Harris is armed with a shotgun: Firearms (Shotgun)  50% (25/10) Damage 4D6 / 2D6 / 1D6 Clayton is armed with a rifle: Firearms (.30-06 Bolt-action Rifle) 40% (20/8) Damage 2D6+4 Skills: Stealth 35%, Intimidate 50% 
LUCAS STRONG, Water Board Director 
STR 65  CON 75  SIZ 75  INT 90  POW 80  
DEX 65  APP 70  EDU 75  SAN 80  HP 15  
Damage bonus: +1D4  
Build: 1  
Move: 7  

Fighting (Brawl) 25% (12/5) damage 1D3 + damage bonus Dodge 32% (16/6) Skills: Psychology 40%, Charm 70%, Persuade 60%, Credit Rating 80. 
JANE STRONG, kidnap victim, age 16 
STR 50 CON 75 SIZ 45 INT 80 POW 65 DEX 70 APP 70 EDU 65 SAN 64 HP 12 Damage bonus: none. Build: 0 Move: 9 
Fighting (Brawl) 25% (12/5) damage 1D3 + damage bonus Dodge 35% (17/7) Skills: Charm 60%, Stealth 50% 
ALISTAIR LAWSON & BRIAN HALL, fathers teaching their sons to hunt 
While identical stats are listed for both the hunters, the Keeper should personalize these two through the way they are portrayed. 
STR 50 CON 60 SIZ 65 INT 65 POW 70 DEX 65 APP 60 EDU 70 SAN 70 HP 12 Damage bonus: +1D4 Build: 1 Move: 8 
Fighting (Brawl) 25% (12/5) damage 1D3 + damage bonus Firearms (.30-06 Bolt-action Rifle) 35% (17/7) Damage 2D6+4 Skills: Stealth 40% 
GEORGE LAWSON (14) & ARTHUR HALL (12), sons learning to hunt 
While identical stats are listed for both the Keeper should personalize these two through the way they are portrayed. 
STR 35 CON 60 SIZ 40 INT 70 POW 55 DEX 75 APP 60 EDU 50 SAN 55 HP 10 Damage bonus: -1 Build: -1 Move: 8 
Fighting (Brawl) 25% (12/5) damage 1D3 + damage bonus Firearms (.30-06 Bolt-action Rifle) 25% (12/5) Damage 2D6+4 Dodge 40% (20/8) 
Skills: Stealth 55%. 
GLA'AKI, GREAT OLD ONE 
Refer to the entry in Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts, and Alien Gods. 

A Restless Night 
Your sleep is far from restful. You toss and turn from side to side, bombarded throughout the hours of dark­ness by images that you barely recall when you awake. Maybe it’s the previous day’s trek through the forest that’s influencing this. All you remember are the dark trees surrounding you, the sickly, yellowing leaves falling to the ground. You feel a terrible foreboding. Something is out there. Watching. Waiting… 
You wake feeling exhausted. It’s as if you didn’t sleep at all. You suffer one penalty die on any CON rolls throughout the next day until you sleep again. 



A Cabin in Darkness 
Yellow leaves fall slowly from the thick roof of branches above. Blades of sunlight stab through the darkness. Ahead of you stands a dilapidated log cabin. The door swings slowly open and figures emerge. They advance slowly with purpose. You want to turn and run, but you can’t take your eyes from them. Your muscles strain as your brain cries out for your limbs to work—you are powerless! 
The figures wear strange clothes… You hear the first one, a man’s voice, as he comes closer. “Come with us. Join us in His service. Embrace your new destiny and bask in his eternal glory.” Its face is lifeless, pale and un­blinking. A dark green smear of corruption spreads down from an empty eye socket. It grins and its skin cracks. 
You wake in terror. 
[Make a Sanity roll for 1/1D6 SAN loss] 
A Path Through         the Forest 
The forest extends all around you. The path cuts and snakes its way between the trees, carpeted by freshly fallen yellowed leaves that have begun to dry and wither as if a sickness infests them. You’re walking slowly down the path in silence. Nothing moves but you. There is no wind. There is no sound. Everything is dead. You feel something calling you from further down the path, just out of sight. There’s a clearing up ahead; yellow light reflects off something… Could it be water? There’s a snap of a twig behind you and as you turn to look, a sharp pain sinks into your chest as something plunges into you. 


The Thing in the Lake 
You stand on the shore of a stagnant lake. Black, stink­ing water lies before you, while the pale moon above reflects off of its oily surface. An unhealthy yellow glow shines through the wooded tree line surround­ing the lake. You can feel their presence behind you, blocking your retreat. You’ve stood there for hours and now you know the time is finally at hand. Strange light pulses from beneath the water. Tendrils rise slowly from the surface, writhing and twisting in the cold night air. At their ends, lids open and blink, revealing inhuman eyes that look into your soul. An array of metallic spikes begins to thrust upwards as something huge rises to greet the night. Like polished metal, it glistens in the moonlight. The spines writhe and flex. You feel a sickening stab as something plunges into your chest…
 You wake screaming. 
[Make a Sanity roll for 1D3/1D10 SAN loss] 



Introduction 

his is an open-ended scenario set in the envi­rons of Arkham. The adventure begins focused on events transpiring at the ill-starred Miska­tonic University and involves the pursuit of a 

set of valuable and dangerous missing papers following an unexplained death. The scenario is at its heart a murder mystery, but one where the true culprit is not of this earth and the facts of the case are shrouded by strange events, greed and obsession. The scenario takes place in October, some time in the 1920s, during the prohibition era. 
While this could be used as an introduction to the Mythos for the investigators, it is perhaps better suited as part of the opening stages of a larger campaign, after the investigators have come together as a group and begun to earn a reputation in certain circles. It also has enough openings and opportunities for Keepers to add plot threads, encounters, and factions of their own to exploit later, as well as provide the investigators with potential friends and contacts (should they succeed) to aid them in the future. 
The events of this scenario are triggered by the unex­pected death of Professor Charles Leiter, an academic at Miskatonic University, in strange circumstances that have the possibility of opening up the University to charges of misappropriation and theft, and a potential scandal it can ill-afford. One of the administrators at the university, Dean Bryce Fallon, will engage the investigators with the task of looking into the untimely demise of Charles Leiter, and in particular the recovery of certain valuable papers which were in Leiter’s care and are now missing, preferably before their legal owners become aware of the loss. 
The scenario is intended for two to five investigators. It will prove helpful if at least one of the investigators has an antiquarian or academic background, although this is not vital. Good social skills will also be of help, as will a willing­ness to engage with the non-player characters. 
This scenario is non-linear and requires some deci­sions and preparation by the Keeper before play. While this scenario can be played in one session if condensed, it may prove more rewarding if played over several sessions. 
Keeper’s Information 
Charles Leiter, a young up-and-coming professor at Miska­tonic University, was not all that he appeared. A specialist in colonial history, as well as something of a socialite and charmer, unbeknownst to his fellows in the stolid halls of the university he was also living a double life as a profligate and a gambler—a life he was funding through forgery and theft. Artifacts of America’s colonial past and revolutionary era hold considerable value to private collectors and Leiter has spent the last few years using his access to the university’s collection, and the private collections of those his academic credentials have allowed him to borrow from, to supply him with the means to support his vice. Generally he has been clever while doing this, forging letters and documents and, where he can, selling them on as the genuine article (while insisting to his secret clientele that he has swapped a fake for the original.) However, for all Leiter’s craft and guile, he did not bargain that there are certain dangers in old and forgotten books and papers—dangers than can transcend time and doom those that seek such knowledge. 
Around four months ago, Leiter was called in to help the Miskatonic University in the assessment of the papers of the late Joshua Hobbhouse by his estate. Hobbhouse was a recluse who died an octogenarian bachelor and had lived in a rambling colonial house on the outskirts of the town, the last direct descendant of a line going back to the founding of the town centuries before. His house has proved to be a treasure trove of diaries, historical documents, pictures, and artifacts that span the history of New England. 
Inventoried first by the legal firm assigned by the Cobb family (a well-to-do Providence clan who are distant relatives by marriage and the fortunate inheritors of Hob­bhouse estate), the papers were passed on to the Miskatonic for more professional assessment of their worth and signif­icance, with the understanding that this trust may be repaid ultimately with the eventual investiture of a collection or the donation of certain papers. This has represented quite a coup as the promised prestige it would bring is of significant value to the university. 
Leiter lobbied heavily for the assessment of the papers to come to him. Not surprisingly, he had pressing ulterior mo­tives for securing the work, as his money was running out and some less than pleasant creditors had been threatening to take matters of repayment into their own hands. The papers quickly proved a godsend in this regard—or so he thought—for among them he discovered a bound sheaf of previously unknown correspondence and evidentiary ma­terials from the Arkham Witch Trials of the 1690s—worth a small fortune to the right buyer. Leiter believed the dusty old documents dealt with nothing more than an outland­ish period of hysteria and superstition in New England’s history, however he couldn’t have been more wrong and was to pay for his mistake with his life. 
As soon as he could lay his hands on the Witch Trial Papers, Leiter put the word out to potential secret buyers and with the help of his long-time accomplice—a failed ex-student and fine artist named Cecil Hunter—set about trying to forge the more complex portion of the papers. This proved to be the start of his problems as the reception to his offer among his contacts was almost universally poor, except for solicitations from would-be clients he hadn’t bargained for and whose reputations frightened him. Leiter found himself at the center of a bidding war between several clients. His home was broken into and ransacked, and he became convinced that he was being followed. Little did Leiter know, by the separation of the papers and the attempt to copy them, the forces slumber­ing in the ink would be unleashed. 
Subject to a sudden spate of horrific nightmares and convinced his life was in danger, he became determined to be rid of the problem as soon as possible. Leiter hit upon the plan of selling duplicates to several parties at once, and so assigned Hunter the task of swiftly forging several sets of complicated diagrams that formed part of the papers—despite Hunter’s own increasing misgivings. Shortly afterwards, Cecil Hunter went mad and the rest of the papers went missing. 
Leiter, his life spiraling out of control, hounded and pursued now by individuals he could no longer even hope to appease, made hurried arrangements to skip town with whatever wealth he could muster, leaving the name and career he had built behind him. On the evening of the 23rd September, Leiter returned to his faculty office in the Miskatonic University to retrieve what items of value he could. Leiter’s last act was a somewhat noble one. When possessed by the Horror, rather than do its bidding (and knowing his end was nigh), he forced himself to look fixedly into a mirror; his soul was burnt out and he died behind his own locked door sometime after midnight. His body, frozen in a paroxysm of terror, was discovered the next day. The cause of death has since been officially recorded as sudden heart failure, however dark rumors already circulate on campus that that is far from the whole of the truth. 
A cursory investigation by the Faculty Head, Dean Fal­lon, has uncovered disquieting evidence of the hidden life Leiter was leading (although Fallon has barely scratched the surface), and the absence of the Witch Trial Papers. A scandal and perhaps criminal (or at least civil) proceedings 


Menaces, Hidden and Otherwise 
This scenario possesses several dangers for the inves­tigators, both mortal and otherworldly. It is up to the Keeper, and in no small part the actions of the investi­gators, just what dangers will be confronted and when. Keepers should not give players who "bull in a china shop" their way through the investigation an easy time of it—the less subtle and incautious the investigators are, the more danger they may place themselves in. 
The Mob: The most mundane of these are Leiter’s creditors, specifically a pair of gangster heavies sent to make good on Leiter’s debts any way they can. Until they see a body, they aren’t going to quit, after all this wouldn’t be the first person to have feigned death in order to run out on a debt. 
The Suspects: Even though Charles Leiter didn’t know and wouldn’t have believed what he had in his hands, there exist those who may well have done and who have secrets of their own. Perhaps a student with an axe to grind or a dealer in stolen art and antiquities with the darkest of appetites—the Dramatis Personae section offers a number of potential individuals who might not take kindly to the investigators asking ques­tions and poking around in their affairs—regardless of whether they actually have the Witch Trial Papers themselves. Such individuals may be easily provoked in to humiliating, blackmailing or attacking the investi­gators if they feel threatened with exposure. 
Bound in Blood and Ink: Caught in very fabric of the Arkham Witch Trial Papers, something other­worldly and utterly inimical to life has slumbered for centuries—mere moments to its alien perceptions. In the Papers’ separation and the forger’s clumsy at­tempts to replicate the broken geometry of the image that imprisoned it, the creature’s bindings are slowly unraveling and it is slowly sliding into the world, with increasing solidity and power. Those who have come into physical contact with the Papers are at risk as the Horror hunts them down and possesses them, using them as vessels through which it causes mayhem and death. 
The Ticking Bomb: Though the investigators will not at first be aware of it, a countdown is in operation and, if it is allowed to reach zero, there will be blood. Simply returning the Papers is not enough and those who do not deal with the Horror bound within will be in for an unpleasant surprise later, as the monster kills the Dean and then anyone else who has touched the Papers—including the investigators! 


against the University by the papers’ owners is imminent if answers cannot be gathered quickly, however Fallon himself cannot be seen to be involved. Thus the investigators are called upon, but they are far from the only ones interested in these particular letters, and the forces bound within the papers themselves are getting restless. 
So where are the papers and who has them? That’s for the Keeper to decide. 
Scenario Format 
The course of this scenario is deter­mined by the investigator’s actions (and therefore the player’s decisions). Facts and clues lie around the affairs of the dead man and those who knew him, and it’s up to the investigators which lines of enquiry to pursue. Importantly, no single clue or its discovery is vital to the scenario’s outcome, it is instead rather the tapestry of what the investigators do and what they discover that will lead to the scenario’s conclusion for good or 
ill.Beyond this loose framework, there is—if the Keeper wishes to use it—the optional factor of a deadline involved, as something has been unleashed from the Witch Trial Papers, the same thing which killed Leiter in his locked office at the Miskatonic University, a thing that now wishes to be free and unless stopped, might cause considerable havoc and murder in its passing. See Manifestations of Horror on page @@ for more details on this. 
Most of the key facts and secrets of this mystery are to be found not in locked draws or hidden rooms, but in the minds and desires of the people surrounding the death of Charles Leit­er. Rather than a list of locations and encounters, the ‘meat’ of this adventure is a detailed dramatis personae—a cast of characters, whose secrets and motivations the Keeper should become familiar with, and most importantly, decide who is the culprit. 
Investigators will need to extract in­formation from the various non-player characters (NPCs) and so will need to employ communication skills (Fast Talk, Persuade, Charm, Intimidate, as well as Psychology). Keepers are recom­mended to revisit both the various skill descriptions and the section on Charm, 

Timeline of Past Events Leading up to the Adventure 
Present year: 192— 
February: Joshua Hobbhouse, last of his line, dies a recluse in his manse outside of Arkham. April: The Hobbhouse estate passes into the hands of the Cobb family of Providence. June: The Cobb family enters into an agreement with the Miskatonic University to assay and collate the Hobbhouse papers and library. Pro­fessor Charles Leiter successfully lobbies for control of the project at the History Faculty. Late August: Leiter, in need of money after a disastrous gambling trip to Atlantic City, spreads the word through his underworld connections of the sale of the Arkham Witch Trial Papers. Early September:Leiter starts to receive interest in what he is offering, but not from his usual contacts; vast sums are offered by some, threats by others. September 5th: Leiter passes the Arkham Witch Trial Papers to Cecil Hunter so that he can begin creating forgeries. September 9th: Leiter first believes he is being followed. September 11th: Leiter’s cottage is broken into and ransacked (by Flinders) while he is at work. September 12th: Leiter updates his cottage’s security by changing the locks and adding bolts to doors and windows. September 16th: Cecil Hunter, Leiter’s artist/forger, goes mad while trying to copy the Papers. September 17th: Leiter has Hunter committed to Arkham Sanitarium. Leiter, on returning to Hunter’s residence to collect the original Arkham Witch Trial Papers discovers they are missing—mysteriously stolen (the Keeper decides who has stolen the Papers). September 18th: Leiter narrowly avoids death when falling tiles from a faculty building roof miss him by inches (see Signs of Passage). September 23rd: Leiter makes up his mind to flee and goes to his of­fice late at night to destroy any incriminating papers and take anything portable of value. The Horror manifests and attacks him behind closed doors and he is horrifically slain. September 24th: Leiter’s body is found by one of his grad-students, Emilia Court. Suspicious circumstances quickly come to light, however the police are fobbed-off by Dean Fallon. The Arkham Witch Trial Papers are discovered to be missing. A death certificate for "massive and sudden heart failure" is written out by Doctor John Wheatcroft, a physician at the Miskatonic’s Medical School, who takes charge of Leiter’s corpse. October 1st: With increasingly terse enquiries being made by the Cobb family, strange sorts making inquiries about the dead man, and rumors of foul play abroad on campus, Dean Fallon seeks outside help. The investigators are called in—the scenario begins. Future Events: October (various dates as the Keeper desires)–in an increasingly violent series of manifestations, the Horror begins to hunt down anybody who has had close contact with the Papers, the frequen­cy of the manifestations increasing rapidly. 

Fast Talk, Intimidate and Persuade skills: setting the difficul­ty level (see page @@). Wherever possible try to encourage the players to roleplay through their conversations with the different characters as this will be far more fun than simply rolling dice. 
Each of the main NPCs has been given ‘roleplaying hooks’. The hooks provide you with possible ways to engage the NPC with the investigators and to complicate the inves­tigator’s lives. 
Finally, the information presented is intended first and foremost as a skeleton for the Keeper to flesh out as desired, adding more detail as he or she wishes—all to make the best use of the scenario for their own game and to suit their own tastes and that of the players. 

Expansion Sources 
Keepers may find the Map of Arkham (see page @@) useful in determining locations of the various non-player characters who live outside of Miskatonic University. In addition, the Chaosium publications 
H.P. Lovecraft’s Arkham and Miskatonic University would be useful for Keepers wishing to add further depth to the adventure. However neither of these Call of Cthulhu source books is essential for the running of this scenario. 

Dramatis Personae 
The following is a list of the principal characters the in­vestigators may encounter, along with descriptions, their relationship to Leiter, and their role in the scenario. Game statistics for each can be found in the Appendix at the end of the scenario. 
Each of the potential culprits is initially described as an innocent party (with regard to the Arkham Witch Trial Pa­pers), followed by an entry explaining their role if chosen as the culprit. Once the Keeper has chosen a culprit, it may be necessary to rework the rest of the entry for that individual, making alterations to the character as required. 
Bryce Fallon, Dean of Administration at the Miskatonic University 
One of the senior administrative officers of the University, Fallon is a charming, immaculately turned-out man in his early fifties to whom middle age has been kind, and who exudes the kind of even temperament and calm authority much sought after in the likes of clergymen and country doctors. He has a pleasant manner and certain thoughtfulness of speech that success­fully hides the full extent of both his intelligence 
and ambition. An able administrator with a tal­ent for recalling names and faces, his calling has always been within the University’s manage­ment rather than pure Bryce Fallon academia (with mathematics being his somewhat indiffer­ent former specialty). His interest in the missing papers is purely political—the preservation of the reputation of the Miskatonic University is his primary goal. Short of direct implication in murder and bloodletting, he will quite happi­ly go along with (or at the very least turn a blind eye to) just about anything that will see the matter of the Hobbhouse Witch Trial Papers "dealt with satisfactorily". 

Relationship to Leiter: Fallon knew Leiter professionally but not personally outside of work. He knew him to be com­petent and ambitious, and more than a little bit oily. He will greet any revelations about Leiter’s personal life with distain but not surprise, and is keen for Leiter’s career at the MU to be quietly forgotten. 
Facts and Clues 
T Fallon will apprise the investigators of the mysteri­ous death (he has no idea of the cause other than "violent seizure"). 
T Fallon has no knowledge of the true danger or value of the papers, nor of Leiter’s connection to Cecil Hunter. If asked, he can confirm Hunter’s prior career as an art student at MU and his dismissal for moral turpitude. 
T Fallon can provide the investigators with keys to Leiter’s office and home, as well as contact with any relevant members of the Faculty. 
T He will discuss the involvement of both Harland Roach and Emilia Court. 
T While he knows a little about Leiter’s gambling, he knows nothing about Leiter’s forgery business. 

Roleplaying hooks 
T Fallon is increasingly anxious to secure the Papers before trouble escalates further between the Cobb family and the university (this may happen when one of the Cobb family dies). 

T He insists on being systematic; evidence must be catalogued, evaluated, and retained (including Leit­er’s corpse) until the matter is closed. 
T Later, failing the return of the Papers, Fallon will seek to shift the blame to another NPC (or even the inves­tigators), desperate to preserve his own reputation. 
Keeper’s Notes: Fallon is far from any stereotype of a bumbling academic, despite what others may assume, nor is he naïve. He spent a short stint in the army in his youth and has for many years dealt with ‘unfortunate’ matters for the Miskatonic University with tact and discretion—ranging from student suicides to the mundane and occasionally less than mundane failings of faculty members. Although he has no great personal knowledge of the Mythos or those that have truck with it, he is quietly informed by his own experiences that sometimes things far from the normal run of existence gather around Arkham and its university. 
Fallon will want regular private updates on how matters are progressing from the investigators. The Dean can act as a conduit for information from the Keeper as needed. 
If the Witch Trial Papers are handed to him early in the scenario by particularly adroit investigators, the Horror will be drawn to him, although its first manifestation will be merely terrifying rather than fatal. He will appeal immedi­ately to the investigators to help him if they can, although whether they can save him is another matter! 
Beyond this scenario: Depending on the investigators’ personal dealings with Fallon, should he survive, he can make for a useful contact in the future and a potential source of both information and employment. 
Doctor John Wheatcroft, Physician, Tutor and sometime Coroner 
Wheatcroft is an elderly, watery-eyed, and walrus-mus­tached man somewhere the wrong side of sixty, with too much skin and not enough flesh, having lost considerable 
weight since having a mild heart attack some ten years ago. Formerly an assistant coroner in Boston, Wheatcroft retired to a part-time teaching position at the Miskatonic University where he had attained his medical degree in his youth. He is a dull, prosaic and unimag­inative man, who is nevertheless a diligent and knowledgeable medical examiner. 

He is loyal to Fal­lon and the Faculty, 
Dr. John Wheatcroft and given the state of Leiter’s remains, he 
was more than ready to issue a death certificate for "massive and sudden heart failure" rather than expose the strangeness of the death and any scandal that might ensue. Although, as conventional a soul as he is, this mild cover-up is weighing heavily on his conscience. 
Facts and Clues 
T Wheatcroft both pronounced Leiter dead and took charge of the body (which is still in his possession in the Medical School facilities) and has performed a private autopsy at the behest of Dean Fallon. If one of the investigators convinces Wheatcroft of their own medical training, have Wheatcroft involve the investigator in the autopsy rather than having conducted it already. 
T Wheatcroft knew Leiter while alive only as a face passed occasionally in a corridor or glimpsed at a university ceremony—a fact he is now heartily glad of. 
Roleplaying hooks 
T The doctor is anxious to get a promise from the inves­tigators that they will not tell anyone about the true state of Leiter’s corpse, let alone show it to anyone! 
T He wants to be rid of the body as soon as possible (as its presence is distressing him); surely the inves­tigators can help. 
T He denies any belief in the supernatural (while constantly looking over his shoulder). He seeks reassurance and company. 
Keeper’s Notes: Wheatcroft will be reluctant to talk at first, mainly out of guilt for his part in the cover up; how­ever, if the investigators impress him with tact and compe­tency (displaying medical or police procedural knowledge, for example), he will become more helpful and be glad to transfer responsibility in this matter to them. 
Emilia Court, Postgraduate Student 
An intense and studious young woman, whose dress and restrained manner downplay her good looks. Emilia Court is a postgraduate student who was tasked to assist Leiter in the cataloguing and research on the Hobbhouse papers. She had a cool dislike of Leiter but loved the work and applied herself to it with something approaching fervor. For Leiter’s part, once he realized she was immune to his charms, he realized her value professionally and was content to treat her with all the attention and care he might accord a useful adding machine—being careful to conceal any impropriety from her, though not entirely successfully. 
Facts and Clues 
T Court found Leiter’s body after she called a custo­dian with a passkey when she couldn’t get in to do her assigned work. The memory is a harrowing one for her. Leiter was inside the locked office: dead on the floor behind his desk, papers and money strewn about him. 


The Body in Question 
The body of Professor Charles Leiter lies in the bowels of the Miskatonic University Medical School in locked cold storage, and will remain so until Dean Fallon has it quietly and decently cremated. The already-issued death certificate states "massive and sudden heart failure," which is no lie, but doesn’t exactly cover the whole of the truth. 
Leiter’s face is a screaming visage of horror, frozen in agony and terror at the moment of death. His eyes are swollen, whitish-grey masses of colorless, clotted, tissue. Viewing the body requires a Sanity roll (0/1D4). Simply being around the body (even covered up) has an unaccountably unnerving effect, putting anybody nearby on edge and giving them the feeling of being watched. Ask for Listen rolls to hear a seeming pres­ence in the adjoining (empty) room (a Sign of Passage); such events are affecting the Doctor’s sanity. 
The Horror may manifest through Leiter’s corpse (see Signs of Passage), raising it up as a zombie to cause mayhem. This should not happen during the investigators’ first visit, but could happen later if the investigators return with the mobsters or Lucy Stone. Alternatively the investigators may get a call when the thing breaks out of the school in the dead of night. 
Autopsy Results: The basic results as found by Wheatcroft are that Leiter suffered a massive heart at­tack causing almost instantaneous death. In addition, the body suffered violent muscular spasms and, by some means, severe thermal damage of the optic tis­sues, akin to the effects of boiling the vitreous matter, cause unknown. Simultaneous organ failure occurred all over the body and even his gut flora are dead, which is slowing the rate of decomposition. None of this is in any way normal or explicable by any outside cause. 

T Court serves witness to the legitimate side of Leiter’s double life, his relationship with the faculty, and the prestige of the Hobbhouse documents. 
T She knows of the rivalry and disagreements between Leiter and Roach. 
T She knows that Anthony Flinders was an unwel­come visitor, who begrudged her position as Leiter’s assistant. 
T She can also testify to Leiter’s increasingly erratic behavior in early September, which bordered on the paranoid. 
Professor Leiter's Corpse 
T Attempts to bring Court round to assist the investi­gators may best be attempted with intelligence and wit. She is strongly disinclined and resistant to glib flattery, manifested in her skills through her high Psychology score (55%), thus investigators will find the difficulty level for Charm rolls begins at Hard. She may reveal that she saw a receipt for a change of locks at Leiter’s apartment (see the Timeline) on his desk. She has known for some time, through overheard telephone conversations, that Leiter has a close woman friend who boards at an apartment near Hibb’s Roadhouse in Arkham, where—Court guesses—she waitresses and whose first name is Lucy, but knows no more than this. 
Roleplaying hooks 
T Court is keen to prove her worth in the eyes of the investigators; how can she help? 
T She is seeking to discredit Flinders and Roach, and will likely place the blame on them. 

Keeper’s Notes: There’s more than meets the eye to Emilia Court. She is actually independently wealthy from old Providence stock, a fact she has kept hidden from ev­erybody around her, preferring to make her way by merit and force of will into a field disinclined to her for both her relative youth and gender; her ultimate goal being awarded a professorship. These facts can be found out by some dili­gent digging around if the investigators grow suspicious of Court. Regarded as something of a cold fish by her peers, she is fiercely intelligent and regards the theft of the Witch Trial Papers as a travesty that must be rectified. Court is also a good option for a play­er to take over should an investigator fatality be suffered during the scenario! (As long as she’s not the culprit of course.) 
If chosen as the Cul­prit: Court makes for an interesting if outwardly unlikely suspect. If the Keeper chooses her for the culprit she hides a far darker heart than any around her guess. Perhaps she plotted the theft of the Witch Trial Papers to ‘safeguard Emilia Court them’ after her independent discovery of Leiter’s forgery ring, or perhaps she knew the particular significance of the Papers and their otherworldly nature and so plotted Leiter’s death to obtain them. If this is the case she will have stalked Cecil Hunter in his apartment, willfully condemning him to the horrors they contained, unleashing the nightmare from the Papers. She is, as stated, from old Providence money, and who is to say that the Courts are not close kin to the Curwens, the Marshes or even that once their name was Ma­son… If you decide this is the case, you should rework her character as a witch, giving her a Cthulhu Mythos skill and spells. Alternatively perhaps a wizard (one of her ancestors) has used the Consume Likeness or "Mind Exchange" spell and stolen her identity so that he can get hold of the Papers. 
Harland Roach, Rival Academic to the Dead Man 
Roach is a paunchy, sweaty man with thick bottle-bottom spectacles and thinning, oiled hair he interferes with whenev­er nervous or agitated, which is often. He looks permanently rumpled and disheveled in unkempt tweeds and shirts whose 
collars look wringing wet half the time—this coupled with a tendency to look at women and children as if they were a strange form of inex­plicable pond life, and a voice with a grating nasal whine—offer the explanation as to why despite his superior er­udition and an enviable list of published works, he lost out to Leiter time and again. 
It was with some regret that Fallon turned to Roach to sort 

Harland Roach 

through Leiter’s papers after his death. Roach intended t o use the opportunity to steal the papers for himself, but instead uncovered the fact that the Witch Trial Papers are missing. 
Facts and Clues 
T Roach has made a survey of Leiter’s papers and went to Leiter’s cottage with the Dean and one of the university’s handymen to gather up any more papers. While there, Roach uncovered first-hand evidence of past forgeries, as well as books and ma­terials taken from the university without authority. Divided between thwarting Fallon and besmirching Leiter, Roach was unsure of what to do. He informed Fallon about Leiter’s gambling but kept evidence of forgeries to himself (hoping to profit from it some­how later). 
T Roach knows the historical (and monetary) value of what is missing, but none of its true dangers. 
T Roach has not seen the body and appears to believe the "heart attack" story without suspicion. 
T He is a firm non-believer in the supernatural. 
T Roach has already been through the papers at Leiter’s cottage near the campus once and has seen several things of note that he disregarded as irrelevant (see Leiter’s Cottage). 
Roleplaying hooks 
T Roach is seeking to enhance his position with the university and may consider Fallon a potential bar­rier (after all, Fallon passed Roach over in favor of Leiter to handle the Papers). Roach will do whatever he can to discredit Fallon, perhaps seeking the in­vestigators’ help to do so. 
T He will seek to besmirch Leiter’s name and reputa­tion however possible. 
Keeper’s Notes: Roach is overeager to be of service to the University of which he is currently among its least favored faculty members, hoping finally for tenure as a reward for his part in this business. He is quietly terrified of Dean Fal­lon, which keeps him in line, but is malign and ambitious in a small-hearted way and he can’t stop himself from gloating over Leiter’s death. 
Roach is also insufferably curious about the matter now its scandalous dimensions have become known to him, and if he believes there lies some advantage to doing so, may try to tag along with the investigators or dog their tracks—pos­sibly attempting to steal the papers (if he does not possess them) or blackmail the investigators (if he is able) in order to obtain the Papers so that he can ‘save the day’ himself. 
If chosen as the culprit: Roach makes for a logical suspect in the Papers’ theft—Leiter repeatedly usurped him and their rivalry was well known in the university, as was the open scorn Leiter had for him. Worse, Leiter was everything Roach is not—charming, urbane, and successful with women. Discrediting Leiter either before or after his death, whether by stealing the Papers as a premeditated theft or even as an act of opportunity postmortem, is not beyond Roach in the slightest. Roach has (unknowingly) placed himself in the utmost danger. Well aware that if his guilt comes to light, his life and career are both effectively over, he will never admit to taking the Papers nor give them up voluntarily without the most extreme coercion. 
Anthony Flinders, Misguided Undergraduate with an Unhealthy Obsession 
A handsome, if dourly dressed undergraduate, looking every inch one of the Miskatonic University’s more well-heeled students in bearing and manner. Behind Anthony Flinders’ clipped, upstate New York diction and well-bred air is the mind of a fanatic, and a misguided one. Anthony Flinders is a history student, one that tried repeatedly and unsuccessfully to attach himself to Professor Leiter’s team and the categorizing of the Hobbhouse Pa­pers, and who was re­peatedly rebuffed. His interests, so claimed were purely in the pur­suit of his proposed thesis, which focuses on the Arkham Witch Trials, and the refusal 
Anthony Flinders on Leiter’s part was 

an instance of the man, while being a criminal and forger, being a good judge of character. Enquiries about Flinders on campus will reveal somebody who superficially fits in and a student with an unremarkable academic record who takes part in the life of the university at least in a cursory fashion. However, detailed questioning will reveal no close friends anybody can point to, coupled with a certain underlying unease about him from those who have spent extended time with the man. 
Anthony Flinders is not merely focusing his historical studies on the witch trials, he is obsessed with them and worse, secretly he is a true believer—a self-made Satanist, a cult of one whose creed is mangled from a dozen biblical and historical sources, but one who is woefully, suicidally ignorant of the truth. 
Facts and Clues 
T Flinders knows relatively little about the true course of events but possesses an obsessive’s knowledge about the Arkham Witch Trials, the legend of Keziah Mason, and Arkham folklore. He believes the Witch Trial Papers contain ‘true magical formulae’ that will enable him to make a Faustian pact, but will not divulge this fact unless under extreme duress. 
T In the lead-up to Leiter’s death, he intermittently followed and observed the professor and may be aware of Leiter’s growing paranoia and one or more of Leiter’s contacts, such as Lucy Stone, Cecil Hunter or Abner Wick, but will not give up this information willingly. 
T He broke into Leiter’s house on September the 11th in search of the Papers. On failing to find them, he made do with stealing some minor personal posses­sions. 

Roleplaying hooks 
T Enthusiastic to secure the Papers for his own private purposes. 
T Will "help" the investigators—whether they want him to or not. 
T Full of crazy ideas, which he will try to present as plausible theories to the investigators, such as, "Fallon has stolen the Witch Trial Papers for profit", "Fallon and Roach are lovers and conduct black magic rituals", "Court is a witch who killed Leiter and has the Papers". 

Keeper’s Notes: Flinders can serve a number of purpos­es, not least as antagonist and spoiling factor. A borderline psychotic and certainly delusional, he’s perfectly willing to use violence to achieve his aims, so long as he believes he can get away with it or the reward outweighs the risk. If snubbed, he will baulk at open attack for fear of being overpowered or arrested. Stalking and attacking an isolated investigator, arson of lodgings, and faking a hit and run accident in an automobile are all within his capabilities. He is after the Witch Trial Papers, and will act against the investigators if he believes this is in his interest; staging break ins, following the investigators, attacking witnesses, and generally making a menace of himself. He will seek to steal hair or nail clippings for use in curses. He is a malevolent, petty soul who craves power and dominion over others. 
If chosen as the culprit: If the Keeper has chosen Flinders to be guilty of the theft then he will have followed Leiter to Hunter’s apartment, waited until night and then broken in, finding the now insane Hunter and taking the Witch Trial Papers for himself. He now has a tiger by the tail—strange events are beginning to happen around him and his doom draws nigh (see Manifestations on page @@). Nightly he tries to discern the hidden truths concealed with­in the Papers, however he is near paralyzed in fear of what is recorded in the manuscripts and that his fate will be the same as Leiter’s. The Devil will not answer him, but sooner or later, something else will. 
Lucy Stone, Grieving Paramour 
Stone is a good-looking, well-made young woman in her mid-twenties, a peroxide blonde with a sway to her walk that turns heads. Despite the bloom of youth, Stone has al­ready graduated from the school of hard knocks and has few illusions about the world, having been a child of the bowery in New York, and having variously been a waitress, cigarette girl, maid and artist’s model in a half dozen towns and cities meandering north from her birthplace. If asked why she left the big city behind, she’ll smile and say knowingly, “In the big city, there’s a knockout on every corner, but a little glamour can get you places in a small town.” 
She hooked up with Leiter earlier in the spring while wait­ressing at a speakeasy called Hibb’s Roadhouse on the edge of Arkham. He was handsome and clever and not afraid to lay down some cash on a girl, which was all right by her. While her head told her she was no more than a passing thing to him, her 
heart played a different tune, and she fell for him more than a little. She never let this show, rightly guessing he’d drop her like a hot iron if he knew. This was the reason that when, as she will put it, “Things got twisted up,” she hung around and didn’t skip town straight away and still hasn’t. She wants to pay her last respects to Leiter and doesn’t un­derstand why she is not allowed to see the body; after all he died of a heart 
Lucy Stone 

attack, right? 
Facts and Clues 
T Stone serves as a witness to the ‘other’ side of Charles Leiter’s life. As Leiter liked to show off in private, she knows the outline of his book racket, although she 
paid little notice to many of the details. 
T She knows that as well as a forger and dealer in rare books (the "no questions asked" kind), Leiter was also a gambler who liked to play at being a high roller—he’d taken her twice to Atlantic City, in June and August of this year. She knew that the August trip had occasioned him losing big and he left ow­ing money to people it was unwise to get tangled up with. When the opportunity presents itself, she’ll break in to Leiter’s cottage in search of hidden loot (she knows his secret hiding place). 
T If asked about any of Leiter’s contacts used in his racket, she will mention that she knew he used an artist to help copy documents—a student of some kind that had been kicked out of MU a few years back—but doesn’t know a name. More solidly, she still has the business card (including shop address) of a local antique dealer who was a regular buyer—a man called Abner Wick. If asked about him, she will offer that she had met him “Once or twice socially,” and that he seemed to her “a real old-fashioned gentleman, but you know, I doubt I was his type.” 
T She can attest to Leiter’s rising paranoia, instability and desire to skip town in his final weeks. 
T If asked if she herself felt in danger, she will men­tion a “Creepy little college boy” she’s seen hanging around now and again in the neighborhood both before Leiter’s death and once or twice since (this is Anthony Flinders). Observant investigators (Psy­chology roll) may notice she’s hiding something more, even if they have already managed to win her over. To draw further information from her requires a Charm, Intimidate or Persuade roll (note that Charm and Intimidate will be more difficult since she has 50%+ in both skill) and reveals that she has already been questioned about Leiter’s death by two gangsters from the Atlantic City mob, who are interested in whether or not Leiter is in fact dead or if he has faked his death to avoid paying his debts—the sudden and mysterious nature of the death and the lack of a funeral has made their boss suspicious. While the questions stopped short of actual violence, the gangsters left her in no doubt as to the consequences of lying to them, as well as instructions to keep them informed if anything sus­picious regarding Leiter showed up, “If she wanted to remain healthy.” Unless the investigators persuade her to tell them this, she’ll be calling the gangsters at Atlantic City as soon as they are gone. 
Roleplaying hooks 
T Stone will take whatever she can get—“A girl’s got to live!” 
T Thinks she can twist every man (including male investigators) around her little finger. 
T She loved Leiter and wants to pay her final respects to his body. 
T She’s frightened by the visit from the mobsters and wants to get the hidden cash from Leiter’s cottage; however if she sees another opportunity for money to enable her to flee and start again in a new city she will seize it. 
Keeper’s Notes: Stone is ruled by her emotions as much as her head, and as such is more likely to help the inves­tigators if she thinks they are trying to solve the mystery of Leiter’s death, something she is hungry for facts about. She’s also susceptible to good old-fashioned bribery for her assistance, particularly if the investigators give her enough money to flee town. 
The Late Lucy Stone? Stone is in a precarious position, she doesn’t know it, but she’s the last living and sane witness to Charles Leiter’s activities. Therefore she’s a likely candi­date for death during the course of the scenario, perhaps because of the investigators’ actions or the lack of them. There are several parties who want what she knows and who are quite willing to dispose of her so she cannot tell any­body else her secrets, real or imagined—including Anthony Flinders and Abner Wick. She could also fall foul of the Atlantic City mob if they think she’s hiding something from them, and last but no means least, the Prisoner of the Pages may have her marked for death as well. If this latter doom is the case, make sure to have this foreshadowed appropriately (see Manifestations on page @@). 
Abner Wick, Antiques Dealer and Degenerate 
Wick is a large, fleshy and somewhat effete man, somewhere in his late-forties, who gives the impression of once having had a powerful physique now undone by years of indulgent living and excess. He has a slight sour odor, masked for the main part by his heavy use of cologne, and an underlying sickliness to his pallor that suggests some morbidity of the flesh, illness or addiction afflicting the man. Wick, 
Abner Wick despite any unseemly physical affects, is a disarmingly calm, assured and cultured figure who displays effortless manners to all and a gentility of a kind rarely found in the rush of the 1920’s modern age. He will describe himself modestly as a "Gentlemen of some small private means who dabbles in antiques and beautiful old books,” and keeps a small antiques shop called Unconsidered Trifles in a side-street in the better quarter of 

Arkham’s commercial district. Like Wick himself, the shop has a reasonable reputation in the trade and any investiga­tors with antiquarian interests who hail from Arkham may well have visited it before, although are unlikely to have met Wick himself as he leaves the day-to-day business of the shop to the hired help. So, at least, goes his public façade. 
Facts and Clues 
T Abner Wick conducted business with Charles Leiter on several occasions, both as a dealer and private collector of rare books and manuscripts. 
T He was part of a bidding war for the Witch Trial Papers, which had already reached several thousand dollars and threatened to go much higher. 
T Wick desired the Papers for himself, however they had soon gone beyond his own price range, although he kept on as an agent for “several other interested parties, with deeper pockets,” whose identities he will not disclose and if pressed will simply brand as “Foreign.” 
T Wick felt betrayed by Leiter, assuming he had come to an arrangement with a buyer other than himself. 
T Wick will acknowledge that there are “dangerous forces in the world and beyond it, not given men to know,” and fears, from what he has heard since Charles Leiter’s death, that such forces gather around the Papers. If asked to elaborate he will merely point to the history of tragedy that surrounds the Hobbhouse family and recent events, adding that any danger is likely to emanate “from the things old Hobbhouse seized at the trial,” rather than anything else. 
T He is still interested in "acquiring" the Papers and will offer a price of several thousand dollars for the acquisition of the originals, "No questions asked.” 

Roleplaying hooks 
T Wick likes to be in charge. He will try to use the investigators as his pawns. 
T He wants the Papers; can the investigators help? 
T He is keen to know all about Leiter’s death and the whereabouts of the body (perhaps for a tasty treat). 

Keeper’s Notes: Abner Wick is a man of many secrets, masks and lies, and depending on the chosen role the Keeper has determined for him, some or all of these may be revealed to the investigators over the course of the game. Wick possesses knowledge of the Mythos and so could pro­vide singular insight into the death of Charles Leiter and its true causes—although he will much prefer to talk of such matters as, "Dark possibilities" rather than in factual terms. 
The Lies of Abner Wick: Abner Wick’s first mask of deception—that of gentleman antiquarian—is easily dis­pelled through his connection to Charles Leiter, which may be discovered either by studying Leiter’s notes or through conversations with Lucy Stone. This will reveal Wick to be a long-time client and go-between for Leiter’s forgery and thefts, although as a customer rather than co-conspirator, and one Leiter was keen to keep on his side. 
The second mask that may be uncovered is that of Wick’s degeneracy and just how deep his corruption lies. Further investigation into Wick’s criminal connections, which range from Arkham to Maine, Boston and Providence, will reveal a reputed dope-fiend (and maybe worse), a dealer in stolen goods (specifically antiques), and known fence with a rep­utation for being able to lay his hands on big money for the right items. He is also known for being a man fatal to cross. 
The third mask, and one the investigators are unlikely to see behind, is that of humanity. Abner Wick is a cannibal and murderer, whose contaminated blood carries the stain of the jackals of the earth. Once a changeling child, whose mother bore him in the lightless depths of the ghoul-bur­rowed passages in the charnel depths beneath the city of Boston nearly a hundred years ago, he was a hybrid-bas­tard, fostered upon a wealthy family whose own babe was devoured in darkness. His transformation from human to fully-fledged ghoul has been slow and long. His long-estab­lished taste for fresh human flesh, particularly that of the young, is slowly degenerating into a taste for rotten carri­on—a sure sign he will (within a decade or so) pass below into the darkness. Until then he will serve as he has served in the past, as a go-between between the world above and the shadows below: a procurer of flesh and treasures, and a dealer in the spoils of the dead to humankind, who are so easily bought-off with baubles and trash. 
Hector & Carla: Despite his power, Wick prefers any dirty work done at a remove by underlings bound to him by tainted blood, only doing his own killing when far from the public eye or possible discovery. The profiles for two of his minions, Hector and Carla Fademan, a pair of local siblings whose ghoul-taint is somewhat further along than Wick’s own (and who also lack their master’s considerable intelligence and charm), are provided in the NPC section. They serve as workers, kidnappers, thieves, and murderers as required. 
If Wick believes the investigators are worthy of his atten­tion, he will have Hector and Carla follow and observe them to learn the direction of their enquiries, or if he suspects the investigators now have the Papers he may send Hector and Carla to retrieve them. 
Beyond this Scenario: Depending on the investigators’ personal dealings with Wick, he can make for a very useful contact in the future and a potential source of both infor­mation and employment, albeit a hugely dangerous and corrupting one. 

If chosen as the Culprit: If Wick is the Keeper’s chosen culprit then his desire for the Witch Trial Papers was great enough for him to simply do away with the pretense of the bidding war and have them taken directly from the forger Cecil Hunter in the night by his less-than-human servants (which may have had more than a small part in Hunter’s final breakdown). If he feels the investigators are on to him, he will use Hector and Carla to throw the investigators off the scent, perhaps using them to draw attention to a differ­ent suspect, or he will send his minions to attack and kill the meddlesome investigators. He knows full well the dangers of the horror Leiter and Hunter have inadvertently all but set loose and will be in preparations for a ritual to appease and bind the entity to his will—a ritual destined to be performed either in the bowels of his shop or perhaps in the ruined Hobbhouse Manse if the Keeper prefers. The ritual will re­quire some victims to feed the entity’s desire for destruction and suitable candidates will likely include anyone with ties to the affair, be they Lucy Stone, a luckless interloper like Anthony Flinders or the investigators themselves. 
Oaks and Shaunassy, the Atlantic City Hoods 
These two are cut from the same cloth—broad, solid, and grim, with ill-fitting grey suits and wide-brimmed fedoras pulled low to shade their features. One is older and talks, the other is younger and remains silent; aside from this there is little between 

Oaks and Shaunassy 

them. They are, in the parlance of the rackets, "yellowjackets, not torpedoes", which is to say leg-breakers and debt collectors—not assas­sins, but they are not above killing if threatened or ordered to do so. They are in Arkham because Charles Leiter owed a great deal of money to their bosses in Atlantic City and Leiter’s ‘death’ was more than suspicious enough to make them believe something isn’t on the level about it. They are correct about a cover-up but completely in error as to why. They start on their hunt a few days before the investigators and so far their inquiries have included poking around Arkham’s seedier side and shaking down their one decent lead, Lucy Stone. They have her under observation, both personally (now and then) and through informants at the speakeasy where she works, and they will take a close interest in anybody who takes an interest in her—like the investigators. 
Facts and Clues 
T The Atlantic City hoods are largely ignorant of the truth; they think Leiter’s alive and are looking for him. Anything short of showing them Leiter’s body stands little chance of convincing them that he is genuinely dead, and even this they may disbelieve given the poor state of the corpse.  They are strongly inclined to disbelieve in Leiter’s death so any rolls to appease them are Extreme . 
T They are tasked with the collection of a gambling debt—$11,000 dollars to be precise—and if they discover the Witch Trial Papers’ existence and worth, the Keeper may decide that they will go after them (knowing that they have value is enough—they will leave the rest to their bosses). 
T They will resort to threats and casual violence as a matter of course, but stay shy of public displays that will attract the attention of the law. They will not engage in willful murder unless attacked themselves. They are armed with knuckledusters, straight ra­zors, and heavy caliber pistols, and will try to isolate a target rather than risk getting outnumbered. 
Roleplaying hooks 
T Desirous to collect on Leiter’s debt. 
T Aggressively curious about everything and every­one. 
T Will want concrete proof of Leiter’s death. 
Keeper’s Note: These two are a deliberate spoiling factor for the scenario; a rival to the investigators who can either be played as a serious threat or just as a sideline encounter as the Keeper wishes. They can also be used to provide some physical action (i.e. a stand-up fight) to your game as well. They can also serve both as unlikely allies for the investiga­tors or as fodder for the real villain (or the Horror from the Pages) if they get too close to the truth. 
A good way of introducing the hoods is to have them pay a visit to Leiter’s cottage when the investigators are there searching for clues. Depending on the investigators’ reac­tions, the duo may play it cool and simply say that they want Leiter and the money owed, or they may be more direct, say­ing that all they want is the money and they don't care where it comes from—if they can’t find Leiter, the investigators are just as good a source for the cash (being in Leiter’s home and inheriting the debt by association). Should the investigators react violently, the duo will not shirk from a fight, however they are more likely to retreat and ambush the investigators at a later stage. 
Cecil Hunter, Insane Forger 
Hunter is a reedy, thin-faced man in his late-twenties with a freckled face and a shock of reddish-blond hair.When met he will likely be straightjacketed and under observation, phas­ing in and out of rational thought and morbid mutterings about, “Worms seething in the walls!” and reciting fractured lines of Edgar Allan Poe. He resides currently within the Ad­missions Ward of the Arkham Sanatorium, his connection to the Witch Trial affair utterly unknown to anybody at the Miskatonic University, having been placed there by Leiter not long before that man’s death. Leiter passed himself off as a concerned ex-tutor, claiming to have visited a troubled student to find him a degenerate state, thus leaving him in the doctor’s care with the promise of contacting Hunter’s family with the news—simply stalling for time on Leiter’s part. Hunter, a bohemian who was expelled from Miskatonic University some four years ago for licentious conduct, 
has for some time had a profitable secret re­lationship with Leiter, assisting him in the more artistic aspects of histor­ical forgeries. He lived in a studio apartment above a shabby wash-Cecil Hunter house in one of Arkham’s poorer neighborhoods and held court with a variety of other dissolute types when he was in money; the proceeds of forgery being his sole income. In attempting to unravel and copy the occult text within the Witch Trial Papers, he accidentally undid the bindings on the entity imprisoned within them. He was subject to the first major manifestation of the horror and the experience caused a shattering of the artist’s sanity. The creature will return again, sooner or later. 

Facts and Clues 
T Hunter was admitted to Arkham Sanatorium on September 17th, suffering a profound nervous breakdown and is considered as a danger to himself, having partly chewed through the tendons on the backs of his own hands. Since then he has respond­ed well to medication, but remains withdrawn, incoherent, and easily agitated. 
T He was admitted by a self-professed former tutor, Professor Charles Leiter, who displayed his creden­tials and who claimed to have found the young man in this state at his home. Leiter promised to inform the man’s family and return, but no family have come forward. 
T The Horror may possess Hunter and have him es­cape. 

Roleplaying hooks 
T Hunter is anxious to get the Papers back so he can complete his work. 
T He wants help to get out of the sanatorium, by any means. 
T He begs for company and is afraid to spend time alone. If he escapes he may seek out the investiga­tors’ company if they were sympathetic. 

Manifestation: The investigators perhaps hear the voice of the patient in the padded cell next door… Only he killed himself last night and the room was emptied this morning. 
Semi-lucid statements triggered by certain words: Hunter is distracted, incoherent, and incapable of con­ducting a rational conversation—and that’s when calm and partly sedated. However, if the investigators talk with him, certain words and phrases they might use will trigger pertinent statements about the recent past, which Hunter’s mind can only now approach obliquely. The Keeper should feel free to paraphrase and add to the following examples. 
Forgery: “Money, only money, false art, but we all sell our souls in our way.” 
Witch/Which: “Her, it was her trial, her papers, her name, her symbols, her prisoner, stupid, stupid, stupid. I can hear her laughing. The cries, oh god the cries of the new-borns on her table.” 
Leiter: “Dead man, dead man, he saw them and they saw him, and off we go… Out–out are the lights–out all! And, over each quivering form, the curtain, a funeral pall, comes down with the rush of a storm. And the angels, all pallid and wan, uprising, unveiling, affirm that the play is the tragedy: "Man, and its hero the Conqueror Worm!” 
Investigators succeeding in a Hard Own Language roll will identify the last part of this as a direct quote from Edgar Allan Poe. 
Sale/buyer: “Oh money, it was all the money with him, no love of art, no real understanding, all dollars and cents. Oh he got offers now though didn’t he, money and money and money (laughs). He was happy at first, so happy, thought he’d hit the big one, we both did, poor old me, keep me in paints and good whiskey and pretty girls eh. But the price kept going up and up and up and up, until we were so scared…right to be scared…the truth…(screams)” 
Wick: “No, no, not him, bad man, bad man, eats and eats and eats, you can hear them in his shop! Whispering, plotting, licking and licking, rats, rats in the walls, old dirty earth.” 
Lucy: “Sees her, sees her next, pretty, pretty, all worms, worms, poor thing, poor Lucy, Lucy pours, waiting tables waiting tables, waiting…waiting…” 
What did you see?/What happened at the Studio?: “You see, oh dear god, what have we done, not out, not all the way out, but soon. Can’t you hear it, smashing at the walls, screaming in the wind? It will be free and then—Oh God— it wasn’t my fault, broken geometry, flaw, flawed copy, in the lines and the angles, you imbecile, don’t you see?” 
Further Advice For the Keeper 
There is no exact ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ path in Crimson Letters, regardless of which NPC has been chosen as the thief of the Witch Trial Papers. This being said however, some ap­proaches and leads will be more effective than others, and clever players, rather than any other factor, can short circuit their way to the truth often faster than a Keeper will predict. This is not an occurrence to be avoided and the Keeper should not be afraid to expand the narrative in any inter­esting directions the players choose to explore; rounding out the fictional world of the game to accommodate them where needed, but also to subtly bring them back round if they stray too far away from the plot needlessly. This latter activity is always best done within the game than out of it and ideally the players should never guess when it happens and, just as in any game, the Keeper should remember that the clues, encounters, and key events of the scenario are not sealed inviolably in cold print, but should appear where and when the Keeper chooses to locate them. 
The Keeper should never be afraid of adverse conse­quences to the investigators’ actions (up to the point of simply destroying them out of hand of course, which is largely unsatisfactory for everybody in the game!), when they are merited and logical within the story and plot of the scenario. The wrong question in the wrong ear, public displays of force or general heavy-handedness in conducting their business may tip the thief to the investigator’s actions and paint them as a threat to be dealt with, by fair means or foul. This might turn the tables on the player characters, who themselves might then become subject to investigation, pursuit, pressure, and even attack, all of which can make for a richer and more thrilling game. 
Pacing and menace are something for the Keeper to focus on and if the investigators rapidly run through the investigation the Keeper should not be afraid to add in extra complications and dangers to slow them down a little: throw in some false leads,have one of the NPCs be out of town for a few days,kill an NPC unexpectedly or put the investigators in unexpected dan­ger! The earlier stages of this scenario are investigative in nature and Keepers wishing to spice things up may create drama and action with a manifestation of the Horror (remember this may occur in locations where the Witch Trial Papers have been, and the Horror will be seeking out and possibly possessing anyone who has touched the Papers). When events escalate, the police are likely to become involved, leading to further complications for the players. Keepers should remember the Idea roll if the players become stuck. 
In desperation the thief might contrive to have the inves­tigators handle the Papers, in an attempt to compel others to join the struggle against the Horror. 
A successful conclusion of the scenario will be all the more enjoyable if the players have to be creative in their struggle to resolve it—after all, roleplaying games are about the experience of play, not who’s first over the finish line!  
Doing the Legwork 
The following is a list of other clues, locations and other evidence that can be gleaned from general investigations into Leiter’s prior dealings, living space, and movements, as well as some possible encounters along the way. The Keeper should feel free to add to these or judiciously place the infor­mation they offer elsewhere in the path of the investigators as required. 
Locations 
Leiter’s Cottage 
A small, nicely appointed cottage near the campus, one of a number of similar homes owned by the University and rented out to faculty members. 
The back door lock has recently been replaced and new bolts added to the doors and windows. The place is in a state of semi-organized chaos; Leiter clearly having been in the process of getting ready to leave. Various (incriminating) papers have been hastily burnt in the fireplace in the lounge—a possible place for clues, such as the burnt remnants of a letter from Arkham Sanitarium, a diary date with Lucy Stone, or proposal of interest from Abner Wick. 
Leiter’s desk is cluttered with all manner of papers (mostly of little importance), however details of his financial dealings can be uncovered (as Roach has already done). A pocket notebook shows Leiter’s accounts, with details of repeated influxes of cash in the thousands of dollars and its rapid removal, the sums involved being far beyond a university professor’s means. Travel tickets and receipts for numerous trips to Atlantic City may also be in evi­dence, as is a receipt for the replacement of the cottage’s locks and bolts (dated September 12th). 
An unopened letter lies on the door­mat from the local sanatorium (which Roach mistook for a circular). This letter is a notice of admission and request to visit regarding the case of one C. Hunter, of whom Professor Leiter has assumed temporary guardianship. 
Partial forgeries, along with one 
thousand dollars in cash, are well hidden in a secret hiding place known only to Leiter and Lucy Stone, requiring either Lucy’s help or a Spot Hidden roll to locate. 
Leiter’s Office at the University 
Leiter’s office on campus is a small affair, with a single desk, some filing cabinets and a fireplace. On the wall is a shat­tered mirror, which if carefully studied will be found to be partially melted. It was this mirror that Leiter looked into on the night of his death, staring into the abysmal horror that burnt out his soul. Study of the mirror may lead to some unfortunate event; perhaps a part of the monster still lies within the glass (see Signs of Passage). 


undertakes her work as Leiter’s assistant and secretary. 
An inspection of the office reveals little (Leiter spent at least half of his time working at home—a fact easily verified by Emilia Court). A number of letters and documents appear to have been burnt in the fireplace. If questioned about this, Court will say that this must have happened on the night of Leiter’s death. Searching through the filing cabinets reveals that a number of (incriminating) files are missing, presum­ably burnt in the fireplace (or perhaps taken by Roach). 
The Keeper may wish to plant other clues here, such as a matchbook for Hibb’s Roadhouse (perhaps written on by Lucy Stone), a piece of art by Cecil Hunter, or perhaps a casino poker chip (fallen down the back of the desk). 
Hibb’s Roadhouse 
A raucous but reasonably upmarket estab­lishment on the edge of Arkham, catering to the illicit drinking needs of the university town. The establishment is split in two: a soft juice and coffee bar (acting as the ‘front’ for the speakeasy), and a back room where illegal liquor is served. Here can be found Lucy Stone and potentially the Atlantic City hoods or those that will happily take their money to rat out the investigators to them. 
The Hobbhouse Manse 
The Hobbhouse Manse is a ramshackle late-colonial three-story house set in over­grown grounds, lonely and desolate, about a half-hour’s drive from Arkham proper. 
The manse represents a continuum with Arkham’s dark past within this scenario and may provide an atmospheric side-journey for the investigators, and an avenue by which the Keeper can further stoke tension and a sense of brooding malice behind unfolding events. 
It is a mournful and now emptied house, shrouded in dust and utterly hollow with ab­sence, and its approach is a singularly brood­ing and desolate stretch of countryside wood­land that serves to isolate it from the town of Arkham. Investigators who take time to search around the Manse are likely to witness one or more of the Horror’s manifestations—see Signs of Passage. 
Details of the Manse have been left rela­tively sparse, allowing Keepers to develop its secrets and contents at their discretion, possi­bly providing hooks to later scenarios. 
Unconsidered Trifles 
Keeper’s Note: 
Keepers should always remain responsive to theactions of their players and flexible in theirdelivery of the written scenario. This may requirethe Keeper to improvise a new aspect of thescenario or situation on the fly. A short exampleof actual play is included here to illustrate this.Such unscripted incidents can be the highlightof a game and talked about by all involved for longafterwards. 
During a playtest, the investigators decidedto visit the Hobbhouse Manse late in both the scenario and the gaming session. The Keeper didn’twant to diminish the tension that had built upwhen the players realized the location was a redherring, so he determined it would be the perfectplace to introduce Oaks and Shaunassy. Afteran uneventful search through the house, theinvestigators emerged to find the Manse’s drivewayblocked by the gangsters' car. The investigatorstold the gangsters that Leiter was in the morgueand agreed to ride back with the gangsters toshow them, letting Flinders, who had attachedhimself to them by now, follow with their car.Since this was the third time they had visitedthe corpse (the first alone and the second withLucy), Dr. Wheatcroft was getting ready to takean impromptu vacation, but agreed to one lastvisit, reassured by the number of people whowould be accompanying him. Shaunassy pulledout a newspaper clipping of a picture of Lieterreceiving an academic award and held it next tothe corpse’s face so he could make sure it wasthe same man. The corpse took theopportunity to grab (and break) Shaunassy’swrist, Dr. Wheatcroft failed his Sanity roll and fainted, and a fight ensued! 
the occult and dark lore (if Wick possesses the Witch Trial Papers, they will be found here). 
The subbasements of the antiques shop are a death Abner Wick’s shop is a respectable and established antiques trap—at least one and possibly more of Wick’s servants are business, not large but well regarded in the local trade— in residence down here at any time and any alarm or the Wick insures that any goods of traceably dubious origin sound of gunfire is likely to bring ghouls from below. 
never see the front of store. 
Should Wick’s secret be discovered and exposure threat-There is an office on the floor above the shop, while at ened, the shop will be gutted by fire and the basements col­the rear of the store is storeroom and loading yard. In the lapsed (before any authorities might pry), leaving no trace storeroom is a door that leads down into a copious base­of the tunnels. 
ment filled with packing cases and a rackety old boiler. A successful Spot Hidden roll in the basement will 
reveal a partially concealed trapdoor that leads down to a Other Clues 
maze-like subbasement filled with old packing cases, chests, 
busted coffins, and bones—lots of bones, mostly human. 
Visiting the Police 
Some of the bones have been fashioned into torches, chairs, Detective Lt. Bill Somerset is responsible for the Leiter case. 
desks and similar macabre paraphernalia. At the center and He can confirm that Leiter died of a heart attack and that as 
far below street level is a chamber, the center of which is far as he is concerned, the case is closed. If questioned about 
a brick-lined well that drops away to darkness, where the the unusual circumstances of the case (the body found in 
ghouls dwell. Here is a charnel shrine and the effects of a locked office, the look of terror on Leiter’s face, etc.), and 



A Dinner Party with Mister Wick 
presuming they have made a good impression, Somerset will level with the investigators and tell them that he has easier cases to solve and that he has no mind nor time for chasing up freakish ones. 
Of course, if the investigators give Somerset a hard time or push him too far, he may take an interest in them, perhaps putting a tail on them or looking into their business dealings to see if there’s any trouble he can cause them. Somerset is easy-going most of the time, however if he feels someone needs teaching a lesson in respect for law, he is not beyond using his extensive resources to make life difficult for them. 
A Telegram from the Asylum 
A suitable additional clue, should the investigators become stuck (or just to add tension), is for a telegram from the sanatorium to arrive at the university, addressed to Profes­sor Charles Leiter. The telegram, inquiring about matters relating to the care of one Cecil Hunter, will of course be immediately snapped up by Dean Fallon and handed to the investigators to deal with. 
An Invitation to Dine with Mister Abner Wick 
Once the investigators have gotten their teeth into the affair and pursued a few leads, it will be appropriate for them to receive a formal invitation to dinner at Crawford’s Restau­rant, the best and most expensive restaurant in Arkham with Mister Abner Wick, "Antiquarian" as his business card will relate. He plans to ascertain their interest in the matter of the Witch Trial Papers, inquire into the death of his busi­ness acquaintance and pick their brains (in a non-literal way for the moment) about what is happening. 

Manifestations of Horror 
In the attempt to copy the illustrated formula from the Witch Trial Papers, the forger Cecil Hunter partly unraveled the binding that the witch Keziah Mason had placed upon an entity under her thrall, a Horror bound in blood and ink within angles and lines upon the page. 
Now partly free, the Horror is hammering at the walls of reality and will soon break through, first into our world, and then back into the unknowable voids from whence it was first drawn. Its attacks on the barriers of reality take the form of a series of manifestations of increasing severity, manifestations in which the Horror itself will appear first as a spectral form that gains power and solidity with each subsequent appearance—the disruptive aftershocks of these breaches will begin to play havoc on the world around it. 
The exact nature and frequency of these manifestations is left up to the Keeper, and they should quickly build in severity. Manifestations should occur in some proximity to either the Hobbhouse Witch Trial Papers themselves or to any who have touched them; a list of indi­viduals which includes: the Cobb family, Leiter’s corpse, Emilia Court, Cecil Hunt­er, Lucy Stone and, of course, whoever the Keeper has selected as the culprit of the theft (see Signs of Passage). 
Within a short time, the Horror in Ink will break free and those nearby will die in an indescribably horrific manner, the Horror wreaking havoc akin to a sudden tornado before it departs. If this occurs within the bounds of Arkham or the university, the death toll will be considerable. 
Signs of Passage 
The following are a list of potential manifestations of the Horror and its growing effects. Within a half mile or so of its location the effect will be noticeably pronounced and smart investigators might well use this fact to narrow down their suspects and searches. Keepers are encouraged to create their own manifes­tations, using the following as guidance. 
Anyone who has touched the Arkham Witch Trial Papers may encounter any or all of the manifestations. The following are listed in a suggested order of occur­rence. 
T The Oncoming Storm: Radios, batteries, and electrical systems will suffer increasing disruption, fuses blow unexpectedly and cars stall inexplicably. This is accom­panied by freak weather—wind­storms blow up with oddly puissant force to disap­pear again in moments, while localized temperature drops cause the breath to fog as if in sudden winter. 

T Witch Fire: Eerie reddish lights are seen in the dis­tance and may be reported at places of note such as the legendary Witch House of Keziah Mason, the Hobbhouse Manse, Hunter’s Studio, Leiter’s cottage or anywhere else deemed appropriate by the Keeper. Witnesses may later complain of illness, fatigue and headaches, while the lights may be the source of a spate of false fire reports to the authorities. 
T Bumps in the Night: The Horror will cause distur­bances near to those who have touched the papers. A presence will be sensed nearby; someone enters the room, but when you turn there is no one there; foot­steps sound in the vacant room above; telephones ring, if answered only whispering voices can be heard. 
T Possession: Whether dead or alive, those that have touched the papers are open to possession by the Horror. Through the possessed victim, the Horror will use its Soul Burn (in addition to the victim’s normal attacks) to attack those nearby. If a corpse is possessed it acts as a Zombie (see page @@). 
T Apparition: The Horror will partly manifest, leav­ing a trail of madness and death in its wake before its final, full manifestation into reality. Witnessing a partial manifestation calls for a Sanity roll (1/1D4 SAN loss). 

Combating the Horror 
There are perhaps three principal means of trying to put an end the Horror before it fully manifests. The first is to take the original illustrated portion of the Witch Trial Papers, as well as the half-copies, and put them well away from anywhere they can do direct harm—the efficacy of this is up to the Keeper, as this is akin to sending a bomb away to explode in someone else’s yard, and the Horror’s visitation is not confined to just a place but also to those that have had prolonged contact with the Witch Trial Papers. 
The second and perhaps most obvious way is to destroy the illustrated portion of the Papers (as this is the only place the danger actually lies). Doing so is also a risky business, as the Horror will immediately manifest in a frenzy, attacking as it unravels into the Æther until it disintegrates, leaving only a bloody, tar-like residue in its wake (a process that will take 1D6 rounds). As a side note, Abner Wick is the only NPC in this scenario able to contain and deal with the Hor­ror successfully, although he will demand ownership of the Papers for doing so, and the methods he will use are such that the investigators would prefer to remain ignorant of. 
The third possibility is the optional Spontaneous use of Cthulhu Mythos skill (see page @@). If the investigators lack 
The Horror in Ink 


Manifestation of the Horror in Ink 
the skill, they can gain some points with an Initial Reading of the Papers (granted after an evening’s study). The goal in using this skill is up to the player, perhaps dispelling the monster from the Papers. In desperation the player may seek to Push the roll and fail, leading to dire consequences and a horrific conclusion to the scenario. 
Resolving the Affair 
If the investigators successfully find the Witch Trial Papers before the Horror’s final manifestation, they can choose to deal with the dangerous part themselves and/or hand off the Papers to either Dean Fallon or another interested party. 
Alternatively they may fail at either or both of these goals. 
If they succeed in returning the Arkham Witch Trial Pa­pers in whole or part, or even forgeries, to Dean Fallon, they will gain him as a professional contact of good standing, as well as being financially rewarded to an agreed sum or $250 dollars each. However this will not stop the Horror from manifesting (unless they have somehow neutralized the entity), and, should the Keeper wish, it will hunt down the investigators. Perhaps the investigators may realize things are not at an end when in the following day’s newspaper they read the front page to see that Dean Fallon (who has not yet paid them) has been horribly murdered in a brutal and bizarre manner (by the Horror). 
If they succeed in battling the Horror and preventing its full, unimpeded manifestation, they should gain +1D6 Sanity points. 
If they fail and the Horror manifests somewhere in Arkham, and the death toll is high, they each should make a Sanity roll as they come to terms with their failure to prevent the loss of life (1D3/1D10 SAN loss). If the Horror manifests somewhere beyond Arkham, where the effects are minimized with little loss of life, apply 0/1D4 SAN loss instead. 
Once the Dust has Settled 
Keepers wishing to continue the story set up in this scenario may wish to consider the following possibilities in devising further adventures for the investigators. 
The Other Buyers: Aside from Abner Wick, Leiter was beset with offers for the Papers from a range of unsavory people. While such individuals have remained in the shad­ows during the scenario, they may decide to take an active interest in determining the fate of the Papers and Leiter. Perhaps they reach out to the investigators and, in so doing, draw the investigators in to another series of mysterious events. 
Abner Wick: Dependent on the events in the scenario, Abner Wick’s business and personal interests provide a rich source of inspiration for Keepers to explore. Perhaps the investigators uncover his name in the course of another scenario that leads back to Unconsidered Trifles and the hideous caves beneath. 
Non-Player Characters 
Rather than provide an exhaustive list of skills, only the key ones expected to come up in play are provided. The Keeper should feel free to fill in the blanks. 
EMILIA COURT, Postgraduate Student 
STR 45  CON 75  SIZ 45  INT 75  POW 35  
DEX 45  APP 65  EDU 85  SAN 35  HP 12  
Damage bonus: none.  Build: 0  Move: 8  

Fighting (Brawl) 25% (12/5), damage 1D3 Dodge 20% (10/4) Armor: None Skills: Drive Auto 40%, History 80%, Intimidate 60%, Library Use 50%, Listen 40%, Persuade 50%, Psychology 55%. 
BRYCE FALLON, Faculty Dean 
STR 50 CON 55 SIZ 50 INT 75 POW 65 DEX 70 APP 60 EDU 93 SAN 65 HP 10 Damage bonus: none. Build: 0 Move: 7 
Fighting (Brawl) 30% (15/6), damage 1D3 Fighting (Fencing Foil) 40% (20/8), damage 1D6 Dodge 40% (20/8) 
Armor: None Skills: Accounting 55%, Credit Rating 70%, Intimidate 70%, Law 30%, Psychology 40%, Science (Mathematics) 70%. 
ANTHONY FLINDERS, Undergraduate 
STR 75 CON 50 SIZ 70 INT 90 POW 45 DEX 60 APP 80 EDU 80 SAN 75 HP 12 Damage bonus: +1D4 Build: 1 Move: 8 
Fighting (Brawl) 45% (22/9), damage 1D3 + damage bonus Dodge 35% (17/7) Armor: None Skills: Archaeology 20%, Disguise 40%, History 50%, Intimidate 
75%, Library Use 30%, Occult 40%, Persuade 20%, Psychology 20%, Stealth 40%, Spot Hidden 35%. 
CECIL HUNTER, Forger 
STR 45 CON 50 SIZ 65 INT 90 POW 45 DEX 80 APP 40 EDU 80 SAN 0 HP 11 Damage bonus: none. Build: 0 Move: 8 
Fighting (Brawl) 25% (12/5), damage 1D3 + damage bonus Dodge 30% (15/6) Armor: none. Skills: Art/Craft: (Fine Art) 50%, (Forgery) 75%, Dodge 40%, 
Occult 30%. 
OAKS AND SHAUNASSY, Atlantic City Hoods 
Portray these as individuals but use the same characteristics and skills. 
STR 75 CON 60 SIZ 80 INT 60 POW 60 DEX 70 APP 55 EDU 50 SAN 60 HP 14 Damage bonus: +1D4 Build: 1 Move: 8 Fighting (Brawl) 60% (30/12), damage 1D3 + damage bonus or 
Brass Knuckles, damage 1D3 + 1 + damage bonus or Stiletto Knife, damage 1D4 + 2 + damage bonus 
Firearms (.32 Auto pistol) 50% (25/10), damage 1D8 Dodge 40% (20/8) Armor: None 
Skills (between the two of them): Climb 30%, Drive Auto 30%, In­timidate 70%, Listen 30%, Locksmith 40%, Mechanical Repair 45%, Operate Heavy Machinery 40%, Psychology 30%, Stealth 40%, Spot Hidden 40%, Throw 30%. 
HARLAND ROACH, Academic  
STR 45  CON 45  SIZ 80  INT 75  POW 30  
DEX 85  APP 35  EDU 96  SAN 85  HP 12  
Damage bonus: +1D4  Build: 1  Move: 8  

Fighting (Brawl) 35% (17/7), damage 1D3 + damage bonus Dodge 45% (22/9) Armor: none. Skills: Charm 35%, History 85%, Library Use 40%, Listen 60%, Persuade 25%, Psychology 20%, Stealth 50%, Spot Hidden 50%. 
LUCY STONE, Waitress 
STR 40 CON 35 SIZ 60 INT 85 POW 65 DEX 70 APP 90 EDU 65 SAN 65 HP 9 Damage bonus: none. Build: 0 Move: 8 Fighting (Brawl) 40% (20/8), damage 1D3 
Firearms (.22 Auto) 35% (17/7), damage 1D6 Dodge 35% (17/7) Armor: None Skills: Art/Craft: (Dancer) 60%, (Singer) 30%, Charm 70%, Climb 
35%, Disguise 40%, First Aid 35%, Intimidate 65%, Listen 45%, Locksmith 30%, Mechanical Repair 20%, Persuade 40%, Sleight of Hand 65%, Stealth 30%. 
ABNER WICK, Half-Ghoul and Collector of Antiquities 
STR 80 CON 85 SIZ 65 INT 85 POW 90 DEX 70 APP 25 EDU 90 SAN 0 HP 15 Damage bonus: +1D4 Build: 1 Move: 9 
Magic Points: 24 Fighting (Brawl) 80% (40/16), damage 1D3 + damage bonus or Butcher’s Knife, damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 35% (17/7) Armor: 1-point semi-rubbery hide Skills: Disguise 55%, Appraise 60%, Archaeology 40%, Charm 60%, Climb 35%, Cthulhu Mythos 40%, History 65%, Intimidate 90%, Library Use 60%, Listen 45%, Navigate (subterranean) 50%, Occult 70%, Languages: (Ghoul) 80%, (French) 40%, (Ar­abic) 30%, (Greek) 40%, (Latin) 60%, Persuade 70%, Psychol­ogy 40%, Sleight of Hand 30%, Spot Hidden 45%, Track 45%. Spells: Cloud Memory, Contact Ghoul, Dominate, Evil Eye, Flesh Ward, Shrivelling, Wrack,  Mental Suggestion 
HECTOR AND CARLA FADEMAN, Wick’s Assistants 
Portray these as individuals but use the same characteristics and skills. 
STR 75 CON 80 SIZ 65 INT 45 POW 40 DEX 55 APP 30 EDU 40 SAN 0 HP 14 Damage bonus: +1D4 Build: 1 Move: 8 
Attacks per round: 2 Fighting (Brawl) 50% (25/10), damage 1D3 + damage bonus or Hunting Knife, damage 1D6 + damage bonus Dodge 35% (17/7) Armor: 1-point semi-rubbery hide Skills: Climb 50%, Cthulhu Mythos 30%, Jump 45%, Listen 30%, Navigate (Subterranean) 30%, Language (Ghoul) 40%, Stealth 60%, Track 55%. Sanity Loss: 0/1D4 sanity points to see Hector and Carla up-close and personal. 

DOCTOR JOHN WHEATCROFT, Physician 
STR 40  CON 60  SIZ 75  INT 80  POW 70  
DEX 55  APP 50  EDU 100  SAN 70  HP 13  
Damage bonus: none.  Build: 0  Move: 4  

Fighting (Brawl) 25% (12/5), damage 1D3 Dodge 30% (15/6) Armor: none Skills: Law 25%, Library Use 30%, Listen 35%, Medicine 65%, Language (Latin) 60%, Psychology 55%, Sciences: (Biology) 40%, (Chemistry) 35%, Spot Hidden 35%. 
THE HORROR IN INK, Malevolent Monster 
The Horror itself is utterly malign and alien, its sentience incomprehensible in human terms. The shape human per­ception will try to ascribe to the Horror when it manifests is of a shifting, hulking, almost bear-like mass made up of glowing, shimmering reddish-black worms, akin in colour to boiling blood and dying cinders. 
STR 110 CON 300 SIZ 130 INT 20 POW 150 DEX 80 HP 43* Damage Bonus: +2D6 Build: 3 Move: 7 Magic Points: 30 *(if reduced to zero HP the Horror is dispelled until the Papers are 
touched again) Attacks per round: 2 When fully manifest it will attempt to seize and embrace its victim 
using a fighting maneuver (Fighting skill), then stare in to the victim’s eyes using Soul Burn. 

Fighting attacks (when manifest): Its touch causes 1D4 damage and drains the life from the target at the rate of 1D10 CON and STR per attack (survivors will recover this loss at the rate of 1D10 per day). 
Soul Burn: Whether immaterial or fully manifested, the Horror may stare into the soul of a single target. Staring directly into its rows of dark, void-like eyes, the target must succeed in an Extreme POW roll or be unable to look away, suffering unimaginable terror as the Horror literally ‘burns’ the target’s soul—Sanity roll (1D6/1D10 SAN loss). There is no limit to the cumulative Sanity loss that this can amount to over successive attacks. Constant use of this attack is what killed Leiter. 
Immaterial: When not fully manifested, the Horror may pass freely through solid objects; thus doors, swords and bullets present no challenge. Magical weapons may damage and affect the Horror at the Keeper’s discretion. 
Possession: Can possess anyone who has touched the Arkham Witch Trial Papers. Victims must make an opposed POW roll versus the Horror’s POW to resist. No roll required if the target is dead already. May use the eyes of a possessed victim to attack others with Soul Burn. 
Fighting 60% (30/12), damage 1D4 plus 1D10 STR and CON drain Soul Burn Extreme POW roll or suffer 1D6/1D10 SAN loss Dodge 40% (20/8) 
Armor: 5 points of worm-like, wriggling skin. Cannot be harmed 
with physical attacks while immaterial. Skills: Listen 40%, Spot Hidden 40%. Sanity Loss: 1D4/1D8 sanity points to see the Horror. Spells: Sense Life, Shrivelling, plus two of the Keeper’s choosing. 

Never was a sane man more dangerously close to the arcana of basic entity--never was an organic brain nearer to utter annihilation in the chaos that transcends form and force and symmetry. 
—H. P. Lovecraft, The Whisperer In Darkness 


An alphabetical index of the key termi­nology used in games of Call of Cthulhu. 
1D100: See Percentage, Percentage Dice. 
1D4, 1D6; 1D8; 1D10, etc.: Notation used to indicate a number and type of dice. 
Adventure: See Scenario. 
APP: Appearance, a Characteristic. See Characteristic. 
Armor: Reduces the amount of damage received. May be worn (such as a bullet­proof vest) or natural (such as the scaly hide of a monster). Deduct the number of armor points from the damage; the remaining result is amount of actual damage subtracted from the character’s Hit Points (see page @@). 
Assets: Derived from Credit Rating. Wealth that is tied up in assets can only be spent if time is taken to realize the capital (see page @@). 
Backstory: Aspects of the investigator that help to define their character. 
Base Chance: The chance an untrained investigator has to successfully use a skill. Some skills cannot be picked up quickly by untrained characters and thus have a 1% base chance. Base chances are shown in brackets alongside each skill on the investigator sheet (see page @@). 
Believer: It is possible to learn about the Cthulhu Mythos from secondary sourc­es—such as tomes—yet not actually believe in the Mythos. However, when a character encounters the Mythos first­hand, all accumulated Cthulhu Mythos Skill points are immediately deducted as Sanity loss (see page @@). 
Bonus Die: May be applied by the Keeper to a roll. Roll an additional 'tens' percentage die alongside the usual pair of percentage dice when making a skill or characteristic roll. You are now rolling 3 separate dice; one 'units' die and two 'tens' dice. Use the 'tens' die that yields the better (lowest) result (see page @@). 
Bout of Madness: When going insane, an investigator initially experiences a bout of madness, which may be either "real time" or "summary", dependent on the situation (see page @@). 
Build: A measure of physical size, strength and durability. Used for animate beings and inanimate objects, allowing for an easy scale comparison. 
Campaign: A series of linked scenario adventures in which the same group of investigators participate. 
Characteristic: Eight characteristics are rolled for each investigator—Strength (STR), Constitution (CON), Size (SIZ), Intelligence (INT), Power (POW), Dexterity (DEX), Appearance (APP) and Education (EDU). Other attributes such as Sanity, Magic Points and Hit Points are derived from these eight core char­acteristics. Characteristics determine a character’s fundamental capacities (see page @@). 
Chase: A series of actions within de­termined locations in which a pursuit occurs. Chases may take place on foot or in vehicles (see page @@). 
Cash: Derived from Credit Rating. Cash is readily available to the investigator to spend as and when they like (see page @@). 
Check: See Tick. 

Combat/Chase Round: An elastic unit of game time against which character movement, weapon use and skill use are compared. Characters’ actions in a round are resolved in DEX rank order, from highest to lowest (see page @@). 
Combined Skill Roll: One dice roll is made and compared to more than one skill. The Keeper may require success in one or all of the skills, depending on the situation (see page @@). 
CON: Constitution, a Characteristic. See Characteristic. 
Consequence: The negative outcome of a failed Pushed skill roll (see page @@). 
Credit Rating: Determines the amount of money a character has available as either cash or assets. Also indicates the general living standards a person can afford (see page @@). 
Critical: A 1D100 result of “01” is always a success and the best result possible (see page @@). 
Cthulhu: (pronounced “kuh-THOO­loo” in Chaosiumese). He was created in tales by H. P. Lovecraft and since has been present or been intimated in stories by other authors. 
Cthulhu Mythos skill: A skill used to determine a character’s knowledge of the true gods, entities, monsters, and fiendish lore of the cosmos (see page @@). 
Damage: Attacks and accidents are said to “do damage”—that is, to cre­ate wounds or injuries. Damage values are subtracted from hit points (see page@@). 
Damage Bonus (DB): Derived by add­ing STR and SIZ together and referenc­ing the total on Table 1: Damage Bonus (see page @@). 
Death: Death occurs when First Aid (and Medicine) has failed to keep alive a character who has sustained a major wound and whose hit points are at zero. 
Also, if an amount of damage greater than the character’s maximum hit points is taken in one attack then death is inevitable (see page @@). 
Deeper Magic, Deeper Version: A more effective variant of a spell (see page @@). 
Delusion: While insane, an investiga­tor may misperceive or be subject to hallucinations, thus the player may be presented with false information by the Keeper. The player may test the situation with a Reality Check (see page @@). 
Development Phase: See Investigator Development Phase. 
DEX: Dexterity, a Characteristic. See Characteristic. 
DEX Order: Used in combat and chases. Characters act on their turn in the DEX order (highest to lowest) (see page @@). 
Dice, Die (D): Denotes that a dice re­sult is required to determine an outcome in the game. 
Difficulty Level: there are three diffi­cult levels: Regular, Hard, and Extreme (see page @@). 
Diving for Cover: A target that is aware of being fired upon may react by ‘diving for cover’ (target makes a Dodge skill roll) (see page @@). 
Dodge: A skill used to avoid hand-to­hand and firearms attacks (see page @@). 
Dying: A character is dying when their hit points are reduced to zero and they have also sustained a Major Wound (see page @@). 
EDU: Education, a Characteristic. See Characteristic. 
Fifth: One-fifth of a character’s skill or characteristic on 1D100. Used for Extreme difficulty level. 
Fighting Maneuver: Any use of Fight­ing skill with an aim other than simply inflicting harm, such as seizing an op­ponent, disarming, unbalancing, etc. (see page @@). 

First Aid: A skill that when used can heal 1 hit point to an injured character or stabilize a dying character (see page @@). See Healing. 
Foreshadowing: When a roll is pushed, before the dice are rolled, the conse­quence of failure may be foreshadowed by the Keeper—giving an indication of the dire result that may await the inves­tigator if the pushed roll is failed (see page @@). 
Full Study: An extended study of a Mythos Tome. Numerous full studies may be undertaken of the same tome, with each study taking twice as long as the previous one (see page @@). 
Fumble: A 1D100 result of 96–100 (if the number required to pass a roll is below 50), or 100 (if the number required to pass a roll is 50 or above) is an automatic failure; usually the most catastrophic result possible (see page @@). 
Goal: What the player aims to achieve with a successful skill roll (see page @@). 
Half: One half of the skill or character­istic on 1D100. Used for Hard difficulty level. 
Handout: Documents or otherwise that the Keeper physically hands to the play­ers. Usually some form of clue. 
Hand-to-Hand: A fighting mode or a weapon attack powered by muscle, such as a punch or sword swing (see page @@). 
Hazard: A location in a chase that is likely to cause damage or delay, requir­ing a skill roll. 
Healing: If an injured character has not sustained a major wound, the character recovers 1 hit point per day; otherwise a roll must be made—see Major Wound. First Aid and Medicine can help with healing. Hit Points (HP): The average of a character’s CON and SIZ characteristics divided by ten (rounded down). Hit points are checked off to indicate injury (see page @@). 
Hit Point Total: The total number of hit points a character has when in full health. 
Human Limits: A player may not roll to affect an opponent if the opposing characteristic exceeds that of the inves­tigator by 100 or more (see page @@). 
Idea Roll: Should players find them­selves at a loss for how to proceed, they may make an Idea roll and the Keeper will put them back on track (see page @@). 
Impale: Greater damage is inflicted if the successful attacker gains an Extreme level of success in their attack—the penetrating weapon or bullet chanced to strike a vital area (see page @@). 
Insanity, Indefinite: Occurs when an investigator loses one-fifth or more of current Sanity points in one game day and lasts until the character is cured or recovers (see page @@). 
Insanity, Permanent: If current Sanity points reach zero, the investigator is completely insane (perhaps perma­nently institutionalized) and is removed from play (see page @@). 
Insanity, Temporary: When losing 5 or more Sanity points because of a single Sanity roll, the investigator has suffered emotional trauma. With a suc­cessful Idea roll, the investigator fully comprehends what has been seen and goes insane for 1D10 hours (see page @@). 
INT: Intelligence, a Characteristic. See Characteristic, also Intelligence roll (see page @@). 
Initial Reading: The first reading of a Mythos tome. Allows an overview of the book’s contents, granting half Cthulhu Mythos skill gain. If the reader is a believer then Sanity points must be lost (see page @@). 
Investigator: A player character. 

Investigator Development Phase: A period in the game when players may update their investigators (roll for skill increases, etc.) Normally occurs at the end of a gaming session or at the con­clusion of a scenario (see page @@). 
Keeper of Arcane Lore: The person who runs the game. The Keeper knows the secrets of the plot, describes the situations and controls non-player characters and monsters. The Keeper is the final arbiter of the game rules and should endeavor to maintain balance and fairness in the game. 
Know (EDU) roll: An Education roll, where an investigator's education and training may provide additional insight for certain situations. 
Levels of Success: There are four Levels of Success; Fail, Regular Success, Hard success, and Extreme success. Extreme beats Hard; Hard beats Regular; Regular beats Fail (see page @@). 
Luck: A measure of a character’s for­tune with events that are beyond their control. 
Luck roll: Used to determine the fate of circumstances external to the investiga­tors (see page @@). 
Madness: See Bout of Madness. 
Magic Points (MP): Magic points represent the fluctuating expression of the POW characteristic. Used in casting spells, magic points are inher­ent to humans and other intelligences. Reaching zero magic points, any further expenditure is deducted from hit points at the rate of one for one. Magic points regenerate at the rate of one per hour (see page @@). 
Major Wound: If damage from a single attack is equal to or greater than half of a character’s maximum hit points, the character has suffered a major wound. A character that has received a major wound may die if their current hit points are reduced to zero (see page @@). At the end of each week a dice roll is made for healing. 
Maneuver: See Fighting Maneuver. 
Maximum Sanity: Equal to 99–Cthul­hu Mythos Skill (see page @@). 
Medicine: Heals 1D3 hit points to an injured or sick character, or to stabilize a dying character (see page @@). See Healing. 
Melee Combat: See Hand-to-Hand. 
Movement Rate (MOV): The number of meters or yards that a character can move with care in one round. If hurry­ing, a character might travel up to five times this amount (see page @@). 
Mythos: See Cthulhu Mythos. 
Mythos Rating: A measure of the depth of Cthulhu Mythos knowledge contained within each tome (see page @@). 
NPC: Non-Player Character, played by the Keeper. 
Obscure Clue: The Keeper may decide to withhold a clue if the players fail their Perception skill rolls (see page @@). 
Obvious Clue: The Keeper may decide that a clue is essential and will simply deliver it to a player (see page @@). 
Occupation: What an investigator does for a living. 
Opposed Roll: Both sides in the con­test roll and compare levels of success; the higher level of success wins the contest (see page @@). 
Optional Rule: Such rules are available as enhancements or alternatives to the standard rules and may be used at the Keeper’s discretion. 
Outnumbered: Once a character has either fought back or dodged in the present combat round, all subsequent attacks on them are made with one bonus die. Characters and monsters that have more than one attack per round may also dodge or fight back that number of times before the bonus die is applied (see page @@). 
Penalty: May be applied by the Keeper to a roll. Roll an additional 'tens' per­centage die alongside the usual pair of percentage dice when making a skill or characteristic roll. You are now rolling 3 separate dice; one 'units' die and two 'tens' dice. Use the 'tens' die that yields the worst (highest) result (see page @@). 
Percentage, Percentage Dice: Most die rolls in the game are 1D100 (percent­age) rolls. Skills and characteristics are expressed as percentages. 
Perception, Perception Roll: Encom­passes Spot Hidden, Psychology and Listen skills. May also include Track. 
Personal Interest: When creating an investigator, the player can spend INT x 2 skill points among any desired skills (see page @@). 
Point-Blank: Firearms attacks made within a fifth of the shooter’s DEX in feet gain a bonus die (see page @@). 
POW: Power, a Characteristic. See Characteristic. 
Profession: see Occupation. 
Pushing, Push: Provides a player with the option of a second attempt at a skill roll if the player can justify the second attempt. A pushed roll always carries a more dire consequence if the roll is failed. Combat, Chase, Sanity, and Luck rolls cannot be pushed (see page @@). See Foreshadowing. 
Reality Check: The player makes a Sanity roll to test for delusions (see page @@). 
Regular Damage: The result of any single attack that deals damage equal to less than half the character’s maximum hit points in a single blow. A character cannot die as a result of regular damage (see page @@). 
Regular Success: A 1D100 roll result equal to or less than the target number. A Regular success is a result equal to or below the full skill or characteristic value (see page @@). See Difficulty Level. 
Round: See Combat / Chase Round. Sanity: Every investigator begins the game as sane, but through the loss of Sanity points may become temporarily, indefinitely or permanently insane. See Insanity. 
Sanity (SAN) Loss: The amount (usu­ally a dice roll) of sanity lost to a char­acter due to unnerving and terrifying experiences (such as seeing a monster) (see page @@). 
Sanity Points (SAN): A rating of san­ity that begins as equal to the charac­ter’s POW. This number can fluctuate. Maximum Sanity points equal 99 minus whatever percentiles of the Cthulhu Mythos skill the investigator has. Sanity points can decline or increase; however they do not routinely regenerate. 
Sanity Roll: A 1D100 roll. A success is equal to or less than current Sanity points. A success may cost nominal Sanity points or none at all. A failure always costs more and leads toward insanity (see page @@). Scenario: An organized and plotted narrative devised for roleplaying, one that includes the sequence of events, character statistics, special rules and spells, and other descriptions which in­vestigators may find useful, interesting, or evocative. May be originally devised and designed by the Keeper or part of a published scenario or source book. 

SIZ: Size, a Characteristic. See Charac­teristic. 
Skill: A defined body of knowledge, technique or physical ability, especially pertaining to investigators and the skills available to them. 
Skill Roll: A 1D100 roll. See Success. 
Story: See Scenario. STR: Strength, a Characteristic. See Characteristic. 
Surprise: A sudden, unexpected attack that may surprise the opponent (see page @@). 
Tick: Investigators who successfully use a skill mark the box (“tick” or “check”) on the investigator sheet that is next to the skill. Roll for skill improvement in the investigator development phase of the game. Skills improve in 1D10-point increments. Cthulhu Mythos and Credit Rating cannot be ticked (see page @@). 
Tome, Mythos Tome: A book contain­ing knowledge of the Cthulhu Mythos, usually conferring Cthulhu Mythos Skill points and spells. 
Unconscious: A character who has received a major wound may fall uncon­scious if they fail to roll equal to or under CON. The duration of unconsciousness is at the Keeper’s discretion. A success­ful First Aid or Medicine skill roll may return a character to consciousness (see page @@). 



Converting material from previous editions of Call of Cthulhu 
If you are accustomed to previous editions of these rules, you’ll notice some changes have been made in 7th Edition. These rules are intended to allow materials from all previous editions of Call of Cthulhu to be made compatible with 7th Edition using minimal effort. Some of these changes are dis­cussed here with the intention of providing the reader with an understanding of the thinking behind them. 
Converting Investigators 
If players have existing investigators that they wish to convert for use with 7th Edition, follow these instructions. Given the limited life-expectancy of the average investigator, this is unlikely to be much of a concern for many players! 
Characteristics 
The decision was taken to unify characteristics and skills; both are now on a comparable percentage scale. The inten­tion is to make it easier to compare and make opposed rolls using a mixture of skills and characteristics. 
The aim is for all of the math to be done when creating an investigator rather than in the middle of a game. You do not have to write all of the half and fifth values on the investigator sheet, however we’ve found that doing so speeds up play, es­pecially when players are asked to make a roll and announce the level of success. 
The decision was made to divorce Luck from POW since the latter is of great significance elsewhere in the game. For that reason Luck is now rolled randomly (3D6 x 5). 
EDU is no longer the only characteristic used to generate Occupational Skill Points. Some characters may have a low level of education but be extremely proficient in some of the less academic skills. This also lends more value to APP in the game. 
We considered the option of associating a characteristic with each skill (as with Dodge and DEX) but decided against this approach. The idea is sound enough: it makes perfect sense for one’s base skill in Charm to be one-fifth of Appear­ance, for example. We decided against this approach for three reasons: 
Using characteristic values introduces additional work during investigator creation. 
One-fifth of a characteristic will be between 3 and 18. If it is a skill in which you are likely to spend points, the benefit of using one-fifth of the characteristic did not seem significant enough to justify the added complication. 
The characteristics feed in to skill points to a limited degree. A variety of characteristics are used to calculate skill points, depending on your investigator’s chosen occupation. 
We chose to keep the link between Dodge and DEX, since it has always been that way. 
The STR, DEX, CON, SIZ, APP, INT, POW, and EDU characteristics (see note following) of previous editions now provide the one-fifth values. Multiply these by five for the full values and divide this new value by two, rounding down, for the one-half value. 


Hit Points 
In 7th edition, hit points are derived by adding CON + SIZ and dividing by 10, rounding down. Thus, a cultist with CON 60 + SIZ 65 totals 125 divided by 10, yielding 12.5. He has 12 hit points. 
In earlier editions, hit points were the average of CON + SIZ, rounded up. The same cultist would have CON 12 + SIZ 13, averaged to 12.5 and rounded up to 13 hit points. 
Thus, some enemies and non-player characters may have 1 hit point less in 7th edition than in previous editions. It is recommended that the Keeper ignore this difference for monsters and enemies. 
Build 
7th edition introduces Build, which is used when determining fighting maneuvers and also chases, and is derived from STR and SIZ (see Damage Bonus and Build, page @@). 
Movement Rate 
In 6th edition, all human movement rates are the same (8), whereas 7th edition introduces scaled movement values (see Movement Rate, page @@). It is recommended (for simplici­ty) that the Keeper uses the movement values as given when using material written for previous editions. 

Where points were spent in a skill that no longer exists, these points should be recorded in a ‘Skill Pool’ for later distribu­tion. When adding points to the skill pool, take care not to include the Base Values. 
This pool is redistributed among the 7th Edition skills with the aim of creating a similar character. When distributing the skill pool, consider spending points in the new 7th Edition skills, especially Charm and Intimidate. 
Some skills from previous editions have been amalgamated. This was done where a skill in one area would clearly confer a higher level of skill in a related area, such as with rifle and shotgun. The two weapons are different in many respects, but someone who is proficient with a shotgun will have a great advantage over and untrained person when using a rifle. 

Any skill points that have been pooled as a result of amalgamated or removed skills should now be distributed as the player sees fit. The Keeper may wish to enforce a cap of 75% on starting skills. 
With the Keeper’s permission, some points may be trans­ferred between skills to adjust or balance an investigator if required. 
A complete list of skills and their new titles appears nearby. 
Credit Rating 
If your character already has a recorded value for their wealth, this may remain unchanged. Otherwise, figure your investi­gator’s wealth according to their Credit Rating score—see Cash and Assets, page @@. 
Combat Skills (Kick, Punch, Head Butt, Grapple, Knife, and Club) 
Each unarmed attack had its own individual skill in previous editions. These have now been amalgamated into one skill: Fighting (Brawl). If your investigator is up close with some­one, a head-butt might be the most appropriate form of attack. If the target is on the ground, a kick might be more fitting. The player is encouraged to choose a form of attack that fits the situation rather than tactically using their highest skill. 
Basic weapons, such as clubs and knives, are now in­cluded in the Fighting (Brawl) skill. If your investigator is attacked, he or she may grab a kitchen knife in preference to being unarmed, but would they do so if it meant using a lower skill value? A skilled fighter is likely to be able to put any knife or club to good use. 
Converting Non-Player Characters, Gods, Beasts and Monsters 
Human NPCs that are fully detailed may be converted using the same rules as for investigators (above). Usually NPCs are less detailed than investigators and may be converted using the guidelines for monsters. 
Characteristics: Characteristic scores from previous editions are simply multiplied by five to provide 7th Edition values. Since characteristics for NPCs and monsters are mostly used for setting the difficulty level for players’ skill rolls, there is no need to record the half and fifth values. 
Skills: Most NPCs and monsters have only a limited number of skills listed, which for the most part can remain for 7th Edition use. If the character has skills no longer used in 7th Edition then assign the value to a comparable skill. 
Fighting skill: Many beings have multiple attack values listed and, for the most part, these should be amalgamated in to one Fighting skill. Review the listed attacks and use the highest for the creature’s Fighting skill. Punch is the only exception to 

Skills 

7th Edition  6th & 5th Editions  
Appraise  –  
Charm  –  
Intimidate  –  
Survival  –  
Art/Craft (Photography)  Photography  
Fighting (Brawl)  Fist/Punch  
Fighting (Brawl)  Grapple  
Fighting (Brawl)  Head Butt  
Fighting (Brawl)  Kick  
Fighting (Brawl)  Knife  
Fighting (Brawl)  Martial Arts  
Firearms (Rifle/Shotgun)  Rifle  
Firearms (Rifle/Shotgun)  Shotgun  
Idea roll (rare)  Idea roll  
Intelligence roll  Idea roll  
Natural World  Natural History  
Persuade  Debate  
Persuade  Bargain  
Persuade  Oratory  
Science (Astronomy)  Astronomy  
Science (Biology)  Biology  
Science (Chemistry)  Chemistry  
Science (Geology)  Geology  
Science (Pharmacy)  Pharmacy  
Science (Physics)  Physics  
Sleight of Hand  Conceal  
Sleight of Hand  Pick Pocket  
Stealth  Hide  
Stealth  Sneak  

this, since it previously began at 50% in the case of human NPCs, so reduce their punch skill by 25% to create balance. 
Number of attacks per round: Review the monster’s de­scription and figure how many attacks it may make per round, and if any of its attacks are limited in the number of times they may be used in a single round. 
Other forms of attack: Many monsters have unique forms of attack. Where possible try to encompass these attacks, such as claws or tentacles, under the umbrella skill of Fighting, adding some notes on how to narrate the attacks. If the attack does something other than simply causing damage, create a Fighting Maneuver that replicates the effects of the attack. If the effect is simply to grab or knock an opponent to the floor, this can simply be performed with a maneuver (see Fighting Maneuvers, page @@) using the creature’s basic Fighting skill. Take care to multiply any effects to characteristics by 5, and if need be, substituting a dice combination that approximates the new range of effect. 
Other characteristics: The monster’s damage bonus, hit points, armor, and MOV remain unchanged. 

Converting Scenarios 
One of the great virtues for many players of Call of Cthulhu is the wealth of published scenarios and campaigns that have been published over the years. All of these can be used with the new 7th Edition Call of Cthulhu rules with only a few minor rules modifications. 
Idea Rolls 
It is important to note the difference between Intelligence rolls and Idea rolls in Call of Cthulhu 7th edition. 
The Idea roll was commonly used to put the players back on track in older scenarios. Two aspects of the 7th Edition rules come in to play here. First, remember not to ask for rolls to uncover clues that you want to players to find (see Obvi­ous Clues, page @@). Secondly, the new Idea roll (see page @@) has a far more significant effect on play than in previous editions and should only be used occasionally. 


G An Intelligence (INT) roll may be called for by the Keeper when an investigator is attempting to solve an intellectual puzzle of some kind. 
G An Idea roll is made when the players have become stuck at a point in the investigation; perhaps they have missed a vital clue, or just don’t know what to do next and the game has stalled. The Idea roll allows the Keeper to get the investigation back on track. 
Skill Modifiers 
Where small skill modifiers (of +5 or less) are listed these may be ignored. To approximate this, assume that a bonus die means a +20% chance, and that a penalty die means a –20% chance. 
If a listed modifier seems significant to the Keeper, con­sider either changing the difficulty level or applying a penalty or bonus die depending on the situation. This may cause some skill rolls to become less likely to succeed, but players now have the option to push the roll. 

Social Interaction 
Where calls for Fast Talk, Bargain, or Persuade are called for, consider if Intimidate or Charm might also be options. This is often obvious from the context, but be prepared to be flexible if your players use one of the new skills in a way you were not expecting. 
Pushing Skill Rolls 
This will not be mentioned in publications that pre-date 7th Edition. Often a scenario may include a consequence of failing a skill roll. The Keeper should consider whether such a complication should occur immediately or be reserved as the consequence of failing a pushed roll. 

Characteristic Rolls 
Where characteristic rolls are called for you, should use the following guide. G Characteristic x1 (e.g. POW x1, STR x1): use Extreme difficulty level (one-fifth of characteristic). 
G Characteristic x2 or x3 (e.g. POW x2, STR x3): use Hard difficulty level (half of characteristic). 
G Characteristic x4 or x5 or x6 (e.g. POW x4, STR x5): use Regular difficulty level (full characteristic). 
G Characteristic x7 or x8 (e.g. POW x7, STR x8): use Regular difficulty level (full characteristic) with one bonus die. 
Opposed Rolls and the Resistance Table 
7th edition does not use the Resistance Table from previous editions. Instead, opposed rolls are made. Each opposing party makes a roll under the required skill or characteristic, aiming to roll under their own value while achieving a higher degree of success than the opposing value. 
For 6th edition and earlier, for any mention a Resistance roll or the Resistance Table, use an opposed roll instead. Thus, making a Resistance Table roll against STR 16 is now opposing a STR of 80. Opposing a sorcerer's POW 18 on the Resistance Table is now an opposed roll against POW 90. 
Poison Potency 
In earlier versions of Call of Cthulhu, each poison had a Potency (POT) value. The higher the POT value, the more deadly the poison. Use this reckoner to convert old POT values to the poison bands. 
POT  Poison Band  
1-9  Mild  
10—19  Strong  
20+  Lethal  
Tomes  

Each tome has a value that denotes the number of Cthulhu Mythos skill points that are gained when a character reads the book. In 7th Edition, the total amount of Cthulhu Mythos points remains unchanged, but is divided in to two values: Cthulhu Mythos Initial (CMI) for an initial reading of the book (akin to “skim reading”), and Cthulhu Mythos Full (CMF) for a proper, full reading and study of the text. 
To figure the two values, simply divide the 6th Edition Cthulhu Mythos value of the tome by three and round down; this is the amount of points gained for an initial reading (CMI). The remainder of the points are those gained for a full study reading (CMF). 


Conclusion 
Call of Cthulhu was created over 30 years ago by Sandy Pe­tersen. There have been very few changes in those 30 years. The aim of this new edition is to retain the aspects that made Call of Cthulhu so much fun to play and at the same time introduce some new rules that provide the Keeper and players with additional ways to create drama and excitement, such as the ability to push rolls and run chase scenes. 
We hope that you enjoy this new edition. 



Leather One-Strap Slippers 98¢ House (rent per month) $55.00
Equipment, Travel and 
Snug Velour Hat $4.44 Summer House (rent for season) Weapon costs by period Satin Turban-style Hat $3.69 $350.00 
Rayon Elastic Corset $2.59 Flat (rent per week) $12.50
All costs are for an average item unless Embroidered Costume Slip $1.59 Apartment, Average (rent per week) stated otherwise. Prices vary due to Silk Hose (3 pairs) $2.25 $10.00
scarcity and demand, and Keepers may Bloomers, Silk $3.98-$4.98 Apartment, Good (rent per week) decrease or increase costs accordingly. 
Tweed Jacket, fully lined $3.95 $40.00 Velour Coat with Fur Trim $39.75 Brown Fox Fur Coat $198.00 
Real Estate 

Belted Rain Coat-Cotton $3.98
1920s 
Silk Handbag $4.98 Country House $20,000.00+ Dress Hair Comb 98¢ Large House $7,000.00+ Outdoor Shirt: Town House $4,000.00-$8142.00
Men’s Clothing
   Khaki Jean Material $41.79 Average House $2900.00+ Worsted Wool Dress Suit $17.95 
All Wool Tweed or Linen $2.98 Bungalow $3100.00 Cashmere Dress Suit $18.50 
Outdoor Knee-Length Knickers: Pre-Fabricated Houses: Suit, mohair $13.85 
   Khaki Jean Material $1.79 Small (6 Rooms) $1175.00 Union suit, Forest Mills 69 ¢ 
White Linen $2.98 Mid (8 Rooms) $2135.00 Outdoor coat $9.95-35.00 
Khaki Leggings $98¢ Large (9 Rooms) $3278.00 Chesterfield Overcoat $19.95 
Outdoor Boots $2.59 Massive (24 Apartment Rooms) Oxford Dress Shoes $6.95 
Bathing Suit $4.95 $4492.00 Leather Work Shoes $4.95 
Bathing Cap 40¢ Slacks, white flannel $8.00 
Shoes, Pumps $1.29 Shirt, percale 79¢ -$1.25 Medical Equipment Broadcloth Dress Shirt $1.95 
Aspirin (12 pills)10¢ 
Meals Out

Shaker Sweater $7.69 
Epsom Salts 09¢/lb. Felt Fedora $4.95 
Chicken, Dinner $2.50/person Indigestion Medicine 25¢ Wool Golf Cap 79¢ 
Breakfast 45¢ Laxative, Nature's Remedy 25¢ Straw Hat $1.95 
Lunch 65¢ Medical Case $10.45 Leather Football Helmet $3.65 
Dinner $1.25 Forceps $3.59 Sweatshirt 98¢ 
Scalpel Set $1.39 Necktie, silk 50¢ 
Hypodermic Syringes $12.50 Batwing Bow Tie 55¢ Speakeasy Prices 
Atomizer $1.39 Sock Garters 39¢ 
Rotgut Gin (Shot) 10¢ Gauze Bandages (5 Yards) 69¢ Cuff Links 40¢ 
Cocktail 25¢ Clinical Thermometer 69¢ Leather Belt $1.35 
Wine (Glass) 75¢ Alcohol (half gallon) 20¢ Suspenders 79¢ 
Beer (Glass 20¢ Hard Rubber Syringe 69¢ Hiking Boots $7.25 
Whiskey (Glass) 25¢ Bed Pan $1.79 Bathing Suit $3.45 
Coca-Cola (12 oz.) 5¢ Wheel Chair $39.95 
Maple Crutches $1.59 
Adhesive Plaster 29¢

Women’s Clothing Lodging 
Metal Arch Supports $1.98 Chic Designer Dress $90.00+ 
Hotels (per Night): Leather Ankle Supports 98¢ Silk Taffeta Frock $10.95 
Average Hotel $4.50 Satin Charmeuse $10.95 
(with service, per week) $10.00 
Outdoor & Travel Gear 

Gingham Dress $2.59 
Fleabag Hotel 75¢ Pleated Skirt, Silk $7.95 
Good Hotel $9.00 Cooking Kit $8.98 Blouse, Cotton $1.98 
(with service, per week) $24.00 Camp Stove $6.10 Worsted Wool Sweater $9.48 
Luxury Hotel $30.00+ Vacuum bottle 89¢ Cotton Crepe Negligee 88¢ 
YMCA, Furnished Room $5.00 Folding Bathtub $6.79 Spike-heeled Parisian Shoes $4.45 
House (rent per year) $1000.00 Waterproof Blanket $5.06 
Folding Camp Bed $3.65 Electricians Gloves $1.98 Ford Model A $450.00 Carbide Lamp $2.35 Tool Belt & Safety Strap $3.33 Hudson, Coach, (seat 8) $1,450.00 Can of Carbide (2 lbs.) 25¢ Lineman's Climbers $2.52 Hudson Super Six Series J $1,750.00 Searchlight $5.95 Jewelers 48 Piece Tool Set $15.98 Oldsmobile 43-AT $1345.00 Gasoline Lantern $6.40 Rotary Tool Grinder $6.90 Packard Twin Six Touring $2950.00 Kerosene Lantern $1.30 Shovel 95¢ Pierce-Arrow $6000.00 Dark Lantern $1.68 Home Tool Set in Box $14.90 Pontiac 6-28 Sedan $745.00 Electric Torch $2.40 Studebaker Stnd./Dictator $1165.00 Batteries 60¢ Studebaker, Touring (seats 5)$995.00 
Miscellaneous 

Pen Light $1.00 Chevrolet, F.B. Coupe (used)$300.00 Flare (Disposable) 27¢ Investigator Tools 1917 Buick (Used) $75.00 Telescope $3.45 Chevrolet Pickup Truck $545.00
Handcuffs $3.35 
Field Glasses (3x to 6x) $8.50-23.00 Dodge 1/2 Ton Truck  $1085
Extra Handcuff Key 28¢ 
Binoculars $28.50 Ford Model TT Truck $490
Police Whistle 30¢ 
Jeweled Compass $3.25 

Dictaphone $39.95 
Compass with Lid $2.85 

Wire Recorder $129.95 Non-U.S. Vehicles Hunting Knife $2.35 
Wrist Watch $5.95 
2-Blade Pocket Knife $1.20 Bentley 3-Litre, England $9000.00
Gold Pocket Watch $35.10 
Hand Axe 98¢ BMW Dixi, Germany $1225.00
Self-filling Fountain Pen $1.80 
Small Live Animal Trap $2.48 Citroen C3, France $800.00
Mechanical Pencil 85¢ 
Coil Spring Animal Trap $5.98 Hispano-Suiza Alfonso, Spain $4000.00 
Writing Tablet 20¢ 
Bear Trap $11.43 Lancia Lambda 214, Italy $4050.00
Straightjacket $9.50 
Fishing Rod and Tackle $9.35 Mercedes-Benz SS, Germany $7750.00 
Sketch Pad 25¢ 
Hemp Twine 27¢ Renault AX, France $500.00
Complete Diving Suit $1200.00 
Pedometer $1.70 Rolls-Royce, England: 
Remington Typewriter $40.00 
Heavy Canvas Shoulder Bag $3.45   Silver Ghost $6750.00
Harris Typewriter $66.75 
Fifteen Hour Candles (12) 62¢   Phantom I $10,800.00
Pocket Microscope 58¢ 
Waterproof Match Case 48¢ 

110x Desk Microscope $17.50 
Steel Row Boat (seats 4) $35.20 

Floor Safe (950 lbs.) $62.50 Vehicle Accessories 2 HP Motor for Row Boats$79.95 
Umbrella $1.79 
Canvas and Wood Canoe $75.00 Tire $10.95
Turkish Water Pipe 99¢ 
Tire Repair Kit 32¢

Cigarettes (per pack) 10¢ 
Tire Snow Chains $4.95 

Tents Box of Cigars $2.29 
Jack $1.00

Unabridged Dictionary $6.75 
7 x 7 foot Tent $11.48 Auto Battery $14.15
10-volume Encyclopedia $49.00 
12 x 16 foot Tent $28.15 Radiator $8.69
Wet Sponge Respirator $1.95 
16 x 24 foot Tent $53.48 Replacement Headlamp 30¢
Pocket Magnifying Glass $1.68 
24 x 36 foot Tarpaulin $39.35 Portable Air Pump $3.25
Bible $3.98 
7 x 7 foot Car Tent $12.80 Auto Spot Light $2.95
Briefcase $1.48 
Iron Tent Stakes (12) $1.15 Auto Luggage Carrier $1.35
Globe on Stand $9.95 
Auto Bed $8.95 

Folding Writing Desk $16.65 
Canteen (1 quart) $1.69 

Glass-Door Oak Bookcase $24.65 
Insulated Tank (5 gallons) $3.98 

Baby Buggy $34.45 Travel Water Bag (1 gallon) 80¢ 
Chemical Fire Extinguisher$13.85 
Water Bag (5 gallon) $2.06 

Watchmaker's Eye Glass 45¢ 
Air Travel 

Tools Transport Av. Ticket Price (per 10 miles)$2.00 International (per 100 miles)$18.00 
Tool Outfit (20 tools) $14.90 
Motor Vehicles: Surplus Trainer Biplane $300.00
Hand Drill (plus 8 bits) $6.15 

Norton Motorcycle $95.00 
Travel Air 2000 Biplane $3000.00
Large Steel Pulley $1.75 

Buick Model D-45 $1020.00 
Padlock 95¢ 

Cadillac Type 55 $2240.00 
Rope (50 feet) $8.60 Train Fares 
Chevrolet Capitol $695.00 
Light Chain (per foot) 10¢ 

Chevrolet, Roadster $570.00 
50 Miles $2.00
Watchmaker’s Tool Kit $7.74 

Chrysler Model F-58 $1045.00 
100 Miles $3.00
Crowbar $2.25 

Dodge Model S/1 $985.00 
500 Miles $6.00
Hand Saw $1.65 

Duesenberg J $20,000
Gasoline Blowtorch $4.45 

Ford Model T $360.00 
Sea Voyage 
(U.S. / England) 
First Class (One Way) $120.00 First Class (Round Trip) $200.00 Steerage $35.00 4-Man Hot Air Balloon $1800.00+ Streetcar Fare 10¢ Bus Fare 5¢ 
Communications 
Telegrams:   For 12 Words 25¢   Per Additional Word 2¢   International, per Word $1.25 
Postage, per Ounce 2¢ Post card 05¢-20¢ Console Radio Receiver $49.95 Desk Phone (Bridging Type) $15.75 
Telegraph Outfit  $4.25  
Newspaper  5¢  
Entertainment  
Movie Ticket, Seated  15¢  

Movie Ticket, Nickelodeon 5¢ Professional Baseball Ticket $1.00 Concert Hall, Public Seating $4.00 Concert Hall, Box $10.00 4-string Jazz Banjo $7.45 Brass Saxophone $69.75 Cabinet Phonograph $98.00 Phonograph Records $75¢ Box Brownie Camera $3.15 Film, 24 Exposures 38¢ Film Developing Kit $4.95 Kodak Folding No.1 Camera$4.29 Eastman Commercial Camera$140.00 
Illegal Weapons 1920s 

Rare or illegal things can be obtained on theblack market. Stages for a purchase includefinding a seller, negotiating a price, exchang­ing cash for goods, and getting away safely.Police may intervene, or the seller may try torob or murder the purchaser. 
The following prices are nominal for the 1920s.For fresh military ammunition, if it can be foundat all, double the pertinent price below and waitone month. 
Thompson SMG—1D6 x $50 for one weapon. 
.30 Caliber MG—1D100 x $50 for one weapon. 
30 Caliber AP Ammo—$25 per 500 WWI rounds. 

50 Caliber Water-Cooled MG—1D100 x $30 + $300 for one weapon. 
.50 Caliber AP Ammo—$45 per 500 WWI rounds 
60mm Field Mortar—1D6 x $200. 

60mm HE Round—$2 per round (4D6 3-yard radius, 30% duds). 
60mm Illumination Round—100,000 candlepower, 25-second suspension. 

75mm Field Gun—1D100 x $100 + $800 per weapon. Those costing less than $3,000 are accurate at 200 yards or less. 
75mm HE or AP Ammunition—$10 per WWI round, 50% duds. 
Hand Grenade—$50 per crate of 24 WWI grenades, 50% duds. 
16mm Movie Camera & Projector 
$335.00  
Portable Radio Receiver  $65.00  
Accordion  $8.95  
Ukulele (Kit)  $2.75  
Guitar (Kit)  $9.95  
Violin (Kit)  $14.95  
Army Bugle  $3.45  
Parlor Organ  $127.00  
Player Piano  $447.00  

Ammunition & Weapons 
Firearm Ammunition 
.22 Long Rifle (100) 54¢ .22 Hollow Point (100) 53¢ .25 Rim Fire (100) $1.34 .30-06 Gov’t (100) $7.63 .32 Special (100) $5.95 .32-20 Repeater (100) $2.97 .38 Short Round (100) $1.75 .38-55 Repeater (100) $6.60 .44 Hi-Power (100) $4.49 .45 Automatic (100) $4.43 10-Gauge Shell (25) $1.00 10-Gauge Shell (100) $3.91 12-Gauge Shell (25) 93¢ 12-Gauge Shell (100) $3.63 16-Gauge Shell (25) 86¢ 16-Gauge Shell (100) $3.34 20-Gauge Shell (25) 85¢ 20-Gauge Shell (100) $3.30 Extra Magazine $1.90 For firearm prices, see Table XVII: Weapons, pages @@-@@. 
Melee Weapons 
Rapier $12.50 Bayonet $3.75 Dagger $2.50 Straight Razor 65¢ to $5.25 Brass Knuckles $1.00 Billy Club (12-inch) $1.98 Horsewhip 60¢ 4-Pound Wood Axe $1.95 16-foot Bullwhip $1.75 

Email Monitoring Software $200.00 Signal Gun $100.00
Modern Day 

Electronics Tents and Campers 
CB Radio w/Police Scanner $90.00 3-Room Family Tent $70.00
Men’s Clothing 

Three-band Walkie-Talkie $35.00 3 Person Geodesic Tent $300.00 Tailored Silk Suit $1000+ Radar Scanner $40.00 Winnebago RV $120,000.00+ Wool Pinstripe Suit $350.00 35mm SLR Digital Camera$450.00 Electrical Generator $200.00 
Rayon-blend 2-piece Suit $200.00 Pocket One-Use Camera $10.00 Baggy Jogging Suit $50.00 Metal Detector $240.00 
Tools 

Leather Bomber Jacket $200.00 Geiger Counter $400.00 
Trench-Coat, Leather $250.00 Motion Detector Alarm Set$200.00 60-gallon Air Compressor $600.00 Oversized Twill Shirt $35.00 
Wireless Perimeter Alarm $260.00 Mechanic’s Tool Chest $500.00 Double-Pleated Pants $36.00 Telephonic Voice Changer $60.00 Welder’s Kit $1400.00 Crew Neck Cotton Sweater$35.00 Pen Camcorder $250.00 Lock-Picking Tools $90.00 
Jeans $40.00+ Telephone Bug Detector $400.00 Leather Docksider Shoes $50.00 Bug Sweep Kit $900.00 
Motor Vehicles 

Cross-Trainer Shoes $100.00 Body Worn Spy Camera $200.00 Silk Tie $35.00 Covert Digital Recorder $300.00+ BMW Motorcycle $23,000.00 Thermal Underwear $15.00 Listening Device $200.00+ Ducati Motorcycle $13,000.00 Nylon Swim Trunks $15.00 Night Vision Goggles $600.00+ Rolls Royce Ghost Sedan $260,000.00 Pocket Vest $60.00 Aston Martin DB9 $200,500.00 
Good Hiking Boots $200.00 Cadillac SUV $62,000.00 
Bulletproof Vest $600.00+ Lodging BMW 1 Series $38,000.00 Economy Motel $40.00 Corvette (Convertible) $54,000.00 Average Hotel $90.00+ Dodge SUV $33,000.00
Women’s Clothing 

Per week (with Service) $500.00 Toyota Prius $27,000.00 Designer Dress, worn once $500.00+ Good Hotel $200.00+ Ford Focus $16,500.00 
Fine Silk Side-Drape Dress $400.00 Grand Hotel $600.00+ Acrylic 2-Piece Dress $150.00 House (Year's rent) $20000.00+ Woven Rayon Coat Dress $90.00 Apartment (Week's rent) $350.00+ Travel 
Dacron Pleat-front Pants $25.00 Stonewashed Jeans $35.00 Leather Motorcycle Jacket $260.00 
Air Travel 

Wool-blend Swing Coat $190.00 Medical Equipment Ticket Price (10 miles) $1.40–$9.80 
Button Polo Sweater $35.00 

Medical Case $100.00 
International (100 Miles) $22.00–$28.00 

Fashion Print Challis Skirt $50.00 Disposable Respirator $30.00 Fashion Pumps $100.00 Complete First Aid Kit $60.00 Fashion Boots $160.00 Emergency Burn Kit $160.00 Train Fares Good Hiking Boots $200.00 Portable Oxygen Unit $70.00 
50 Miles $6.25

Shoulder Bag $350.00 100 Miles $12.50
Spandex Bicycle Shorts $20.00 

Outdoor & Travel Gear 500 Miles $62.50
Pocket Vest $60.00 

Bulletproof Vest $600.00+ 4-Person Cook Set $25.00 Propane Camp Stove $60.00 Sea Voyage Portable Chemical Toilet $110.00
Communications (U.S. / England)
Poly/Cotton Sleeping Bag $30.00 Local Telephone Service $20.00 Polar Sleeping Bag $200.00 First Class (one way) $3,500+ 
Cordless Phone $50.00 6-watt Fluorescent Lamp $30.00 Standard Class (one way) $1,600+ Cell Phone $50.00 Stabilized Binoculars $1,300.00 Freight $1,400+ Smart Phone $99.00+ 
“Survival” Knife $65.00 Swiss Army Knife $30.00 Machete, Cheap $20.00
Computers 

10.5mm Dry Rope (50m) $250.00 Cheap PC System $100.00+ G.P.S. Handheld $260.00 Laptop $400.00+ Climbing Gear (1 person) $2000.00 
Good PC System $1,500.00+ Touring Kayak (1 person $1000.00 Good Laptop $1,300.00+ Scuba Gear, Good $2500.00+ Tablet $400.00 
Ammunition & Weapons 
Firearm Ammunition 
.22 Long Rifle (500) .220 Swift (50) .25 Automatic (50) .30 Carbine (50) .30-06 Rifle (50) .357 Magnum (50) .38 Special (50) 5.56mm (50) 9mm Parabellum (50) .44 Magnum (50) .45 Automatic (100) 10-Gauge Shell (25) 12-Gauge Shell (25) 16-Gauge Shell (25) 20-Gauge Shell (25) 
$21.00 $24.00 $15.00 $15.00 $15.00 $22.00 $17.00 $24.00 $12.00 $39.00 $23.00 $40.00 $30.00 $26.00 $28.00 

Illegal Suppressor (Pistol) $1000.00+ 
Laser Gunsight Optic Scope Hand-Held Taser Stun Baton Pepper Spray Aluminum Knuckles Crossbow, Compound 12 Crossbow Quarrels $300.00+ $200.00+ $50.00+ $65.00 $16.00 $20.00 $600.00+ $38.00 
Blowdart Pen (with darts) $35.00 Bandolier $60.00 Nunchaku $25.00 



Hand-to-Hand Weapons 

Name Skill Damage Base Range Uses per Bullets in Cost 20s/ Malfunction Common in Round Gun (Mag) Modern Era 
Bow and Firearms 1D6+half DB 30 yards 1 1 $7/$75 97 1920s, Arrows (Bow) Modern 
Brass Fighting 1D3+1+DB Touch 1 -$1/$10 -1920s, Knuckles (Brawl) Modern 
Bullwhip Fighting 1D3+half DB 10 feet 1 -$5/$50 -1920s (Whip) 
Burning Torch Fighting 1D6+burn Touch 1 -$0.05/$0.50 -1920s, (Brawl) Modern 
Chainsaw* (i) Fighting 2D8 Touch 1 --/$300 95 Modern (Chainsaw) 
Blackjack Fighting 1D8+DB Touch 1 -$2/$15 -1920s, (Cosh, (Brawl) Modern life-preserver) 
Club, large Fighting 1D8+DB Touch 1 -$3/$35 -1920s, (baseball, (Brawl) Modern cricket bat, poker) 
Club,small Fighting 1D6+DB Touch 1 -$3/$35 -1920s, (nightstick) (Brawl) Modern 
Crossbow (i) Firearms 1D8+2 50 yards 1/2 1 $10/$100 96 1920s, (Bow) Modern 
Garrote*(i) Fighting 1D6+DB Touch 1 -$0.50/$3 -1920s, (Garrote) Modern 
Hatchet/Sickle Fighting (Axe) 1D6+1+DB Touch 1 -$3/$9 -1920s, 
(i) Modern 
Knife, Large Fighting 1D8+DB Touch 1 -$4/$50 -1920s, (machete, (Brawl) Modern etc.) (i) 
Knife, Fighting 1D4+2+DB Touch 1 -$2/$15 -1920s, Medium (Brawl) Modern (carving knife, etc.) (i) 
Knife, Small Fighting 1D4+DB Touch 1 -$2/$6 -1920s, (switchblade, (Brawl) Modern etc.) (i) 
Live Wire, Fighting 2D8+Stun Touch 1 --95 Modern 220-volt (Brawl) charge 
Mace Spray* Fighting Stun 6 feet 1 25 Squirts -/$10 -1920s, (Brawl) Modern 
Nunchaku Fighting 1D8+DB Touch 1 -$1/$10 -1920s, (Flail) Modern 
Rock, Thrown Throw 1D4+half DB STR feet 1 ---1920s, Modern 
Shuriken (i) Throw 1D3+half DB 20 yards 2 One Use $0.50/$3 100 1920s, Modern 
Spear (cavalry Fighting 1D8+1 Touch 1 -$25/$150 -1920s, lance)* (Spear) Modern 
Spear, Throw 1D8+half DB STR yards 1 -$1/$25 -Rare Thrown (i) 
Sword, heavy  Fighting  1D8+1+DB  Touch  1  - $30/$75  - 1920s,Mod­ 
(cavalry  (sword)  ern  
saber)  
Sword,  Fighting  1D6+1+DB  Touch  1  - $15/$100  - 1920s,  
medium  (Sword)  Modern  
(rapier, heavy  
epee)(i)  
Sword,  Fighting  1D6+DB  Touch  1  - $25/$100  - 1920s,  
light(sharp­ (Sword)  Modern  
ened fencing  
foil, sword  
cane) (i)  
Taser  Fighting  1D3+stun  Touch  1  Varies  -/$200  97  Modern  
(contact)*  (Brawl)  
Taser (dart)  Firearms  1D3+stun  15 feet  1  3  _/$400  95  Modern  
(Handgun)  
War  Throw  1D8+half STR  STR yards  1  - $2/$4  - Rare  
Boomerang  
Wood Axe (i)  Fighting (Axe)  1D8+2+DB  Touch  1  - $5/$10  - 1920s,  
Modern  
Handguns  
Name  Skill  Damage  Base Range  Uses per  Bullets in  Cost 20s/  Malfunction  Common in  
Round  Gun (Mag)  Modern  Era  
Flintlock  Firearms  1D6+1  10 yards  1/4  1  $30/$300  95  Rare  
(handgun)  
.22 Short  Firearms  1D6  10 yards  1 (3)  6  $25/$190  100  1920s,  
Automatic  (handgun)  Modern  
.25 Derringer  Firearms  1D6  3 yards  1  1  $12/$55  100  1920a  
(1B)  (handgun)  
.32 or 7.65mm  Firearms  1D8  15 yards  1 (3)  6  $15/$200  100  1920s,  
Revolver  (handgun)  Modern  
.32 or 7.65mm  Firearms  1D8  15 yards  1 (3)  8  $20/$350  99  1920s,  
Automatic  (handgun)  Modern  
.357 Magnum  Firearms  1D8+1D4  15 yards  1 (3)  6  -/$425  100  Modern  
Revolver  (handgun)  
.38 or 9mm  Firearms  1D10  15 yards  1 (3)  6  $25/$200  100  1920s,  
Revolver  (handgun)  Modern  
.38 Automatic  Firearms  1D10  15 yards  1 (3)  8  $30/$375  99  1920s,  
(handgun)  Modern  
Beretta M9  Firearms  1D10  15 yards  1 (3)  15  -/$500  98  Modern  
(handgun)  
Glock 17  Firearms  1D10  15 yards  1 (3)  17  -/$500  98  Modern  
9mm Auto  (handgun)  
Model P08  Firearms  1D10  15 yards  1 (3)  8  $75/$600  99  1920s,  
Luger  (handgun)  Modern  
.41 Revolver  Firearms  1D10  15 yards  1 (3)  8  $30/­ 100  1920s, Rare  
(handgun)  
.44 Magnum  Firearms  1D10+1D4+2  15 yards  1 (3)  6  -/$475  100  Modern  
Revolver  (handgun)  
.45 Revolver  Firearms  1D10+2  15 yards  1 (3)  6  $30/$300  100  1920S,  
(handgun)  Modern  
.45 Automatic  Firearms  1D10+2  15 yards  1 (3)  7  $40/$375  100  1920s,  
(handgun)  Modern  
IMI Desert  Firearms  1D10+1D6+3  15 yards  1 (3)  7  -/$650  94  Modern  
Eagle  (handgun)  

Rifles(i)*, see also Assault Rifles 

Name  Skill  Damage  Base Range  Uses per  Bullets in  Cost 20s/  Malfunction  Common in  
Round  Gun (Mag)  Modern  Era  
.58 Springfield   Firearms  1D10+4  60 yards  1/4  1  $25/$350  95  Rare  
Rifle Musket  (rifle)  
.22 Bolt-Ac- Firearms  1D6+1  30 yards  1  6  $13/$70  99  1920S,  
tion Rifle  (rifle)  Modern  
.30 Lever-Ac- Firearms  2D6  50 yards  1  6  $19/$150  98  1920s,  
tion Carbine  (rifle)  Modern  
.45 Marti- Firearms  1D8+1D6+3  80 yards  1/3  1  $20/$200  100  1920s  
ni-Henry Rifle  (rifle)  
Col. Moran's  Firearms  2D6+1  20 yards  1/3  1  $200  88  1920s  
Air Rifle  (rifle)  
Garand M1,  Firearms  2D6+4  110 yards  1  8  $400  100  WWII, Later  
M2 Rifle  (rifle)  
SKS Carbine  Firearms  2D6+1  90 yards  1 (2)  10  $500  97  Modern  
(rifle)  
.303  Firearms  2D6+4  110 yards  1  5  $50/$300  100  1920s,  
Lee-Enfield  (rifle)  Modern  
.30-06  Firearms  2D6+4  110 yards  1  5  $75/ $175  100  1920s,  
Bolt-Action  (rifle)).  Modern  
Rifle  
.30-06  Firearms  2D6+4  110 yards  1  5  $275  100  Modern  
Semi-Auto­ (rifle)  
matic Rifle  
.444 Marlin  Firearms  2D8+4  110 yards  1  5  $400  98  Modern  
Rifle  (rifle)  
Elephant Gun  Firearms  3D6+4  100 yards  1 or 2  2  $400/$1,800  100  1920s,  
(2B)  (rifle)  Modern  
Shotguns*  
Name  Skill  Damage  Base Range  Uses per  Bullets in  Cost 20s/  Malfunction  Common in  
Round  Gun (Mag)  Modern  Era  
20-gauge  Firearms  2D6/1D6/1D3  10/20/50  1 or 2  2  $35/Rare  100  1920s  
Shotgun (2B)  (shotgun)  yards  
16-gauge  Firearms  2D6+2/  10/20/50  1 or 2  2  $40/Rare  100  1920s  
Shotgun (2B)  (shotgun)  1D6+1/1D4  yards  
12-gauge  Firearms  4D6/2D6/1D6  10/20/50  1 or 2  2  $40/$200  100  1920s,  
Shotgun (2B)  (shotgun)  yards  Modern  
12-gauge  Firearms  4D6/2D6/1D6  10/20/50  1  5  $45/$100  100  Modern  
Shotgun  (shotgun)  yards  
(Pump)  
12-gauge  Firearms  4D6/2D6/1D6  10/20/50  2  5  $45/$100  100  Modern  
Shotgun  (shotgun)  yeards  
(semi-auto)  
12-gauge  Firearms  4D6/1D6  5/10 yards  1 or 2  2  N/A  100  1920s  
Shotgun (2B  (shotgun)  
sawed off)  
10-gauge  Firearms  4D6+2/  10/20/50  1 or 2  2  Rare  100  1920s Rare  
Shotgun (2B)  (shotgun)  2D6+1/1D4  yards  
12-gauge  Firearms  4D6/2D6/1D6  10/20/50  1 or 2  7  -/$895  100  Modern  
Benelli M3  (shotgun)  yards  
(folding  
stock)  
12-gauge  Firearms  4D6/2D6/1D6  10/20/50  1  8  -/$600  98  Modern  
SPAS (folding  (shotgun)  yards  
stock)  

Assault Rifles (i) 
Name  Skill  Damage  Base Range  Uses per  Bullets in  Cost 20s/  Malfunction  Common in  
Round  Gun (Mag)  Modern  Era  
AK-47 or  Firearms  2D6+1  100 yards  1 (2) or full  30  $200  100  Modern  
AKM  (rifle)  auto  
AK-74  Firearms  2D6  110 yards  1 (2) or full  30  $1,000  97  Modern  
(rifle)  auto  
Barrett Model  Firearms  2D10+1D8+6  250 yards  1  11  $3,000  96  Modern  
82  (rifle)  
FN FAL Light  Firearms  2D6+4  110 yards  1 (2) or  20  $1,500  97  Modern  
Automatic  (rifle)  burst 3  
Galil Assault  Firearms  2D6  110 yards  1 or full auto  20  $2,000  98  Modern  
Rifle  (rifle)  
M16A2  Firearms  2D6  110 yards  1 (2) or  30  N/A  97  Modern  
(rifle)  burst 3  
M4  Firearms  2D6  90 yards  1 or burst 3  30  N/A  97  Modern  
(rifle)  
Steyr AUG  Firearms  2D6  110 yards  1 (2) or full  30  $1,100  99  Modern  
(rifle)  auto  
Beretta  Firearms  2D6  110 yards  1 or full auto  30  $2,800  99  Modern  
M70/90  (rifle)  
Submachine Guns (i)  
Name  Skill  Damage  Base Range  Uses per  Bullets in  Cost 20s/  Malfunction  Common in  
Round  Gun (Mag)  Modern  Era  
Bergmann  Firearms  1D10  20 yards  1 (2) or full  20/30/32  $1,000  96  1920s  
MP181/  (SMG)  auto  
MP2811  
Heckler &  Firearms  1D10  20 yards  1 (2) or full  15/30  N/A  97  Modern  
Koch MP5  (SMG)  auto  
Ingram  Firearms  1D10  15 yards  1 (3) or full  32  $750  96  Modern  
MAC-11  (SMG)  auto  
Skorpion  Firearms  1D8  15 yards  1 (3) or full  20  N/A  96  Modern  
SMG  (SMG)  auto  
Thompson  Firearms  1D10+2  20 yards  1 or full auto  20/30/50  $200  96  1920s  
(SMG)  
Uzi SMG  Firearms  1D10  20 yards  1 (2) or full  32  $1,000  98  Modern  
(SMG)  auto  
Machine Guns (i)  
Name  Skill  Damage  Base Range  Uses per  Bullets in  Cost 20s/  Malfunctions  Common in  
Round  Gun (Mag)  Modern  Era  
Model 1882  Firearms  2D6+4  100 yards  Full auto  200  $2,000  96  1920s Rare  
Gatling Gun  (MG)  
Browning Auto  Firearms  2D6+4  90 yards  1 (2) or full  20  $800  100  1920s  
Rifle M1918  (MG)  auto  
.30 Browning  Firearms  2D6+4  150 yards  Full auto  250  $3,000  96  1920s  
M1917A1  (MG)  
Bren Gun  Firearms  2D6+4  110 yards  1 or full auto  30/100  $3,000  96  1920s  
(MG)  
Mark I Lewis  Firearms  2D6+4  110 yards  Full auto  27/97  $3,000  96  1920s  
Gun  (MG)  
Minigun*  Firearms  2D6+4  200 yards  Full auto  4000  N/A  98  Modern  
(MG)  
FN Minimi,  Firearms  2D6  110 yards  Full auto  30/200  N/A  99  Modern  
5.56mm,  (MG)  

Vickers .303 Firearms 2D6+4 110 yards Full auto 250 N/A 99 1920s Machine Gun (MG) 
Explosives, Heavy Weapons, Misc. (i) 

Name Skill Damage Base Range Uses per Bullets in Cost 20s/ Malfunctions Common in Round Gun (Mag) Modern Era 
Molotov Throw 2D6+burn STR feet 1/2 1 only N/A 95 1920s, Cocktail Modern 
Signal Firearms 1D10+1D3 10 1/2 1 $15/$75 100 1920s, Handgun (HG) burn Modern (Flare gun) 
M79 Grenade Firearms 3D10/2 yards 20 1/3 1 N/A 99 Modern Launcher (Heavy) 
Dynamite Throw 4D10/ 3 yards STR feet 1/2 1 only $2/$5 99 1920s, Stick* Modern 
Blasting Cap Electrical 2D10/ 1 yard N/A N/A One use $20/box 100 1920s, Repair Modern 
Pipe Bomb Demolitions 1D10/ 3 yards In place One use 1 only N/A 95 1920s, Modern 
Plastique Demolitions 6D10/ 3 yards In place One use 1 only N/A 99 Modern (C-4), 4 oz. 
Hand Throw 4D10/ 3 yards STR feet 1/2 1 only N/A 99 1920s, Grenade* Modern 
81mm Mortar Artillery 6D10/ 6 yards 500 yards 2 Separate N/A 100 Modern 
75mm Field Artillery 10D10/ 2 500 yards 1/4 Separate $1,500/-99 1920s, Gun yards Modern 
120mm Artillery 15D10/ 4 2000 yards 1 Separate N/A 100 Modern Tank Gun yards (stabilized) 
Ship-mounted Artillery 12D10/ 4 3000 yards 2 Auto-maga-N/A 98 Modern 5-inch rifle, yards zine stabilized 
Anti-Person-Demolitions 4D10/ 5 yards In place In place One use N/A 99 1920s, nel Mine Modern 
Claymore Demolitions 6D6/ 20 yards In place In place One use N/A 99 Modern Mine* 
Flamethrower Firearms 2D6+burn 25 yards 1 At least 10 N/A 93 1920s, (Flamethrow-Modern er) 
LAW* Firearms 8D10/ 1 yard 150 yards 1 1 N/A 98 Modern (Heavy) 
deal increased damage, even on an Extreme success. 
Key 

(i) - Indicates a weapon category or specific weapon which 
Acronyms: 

can impale. On an Extreme level of success an ‘impale’ has G (HG): Handgun 
been inflicted: maximum damage (plus maximum damage bonus for melee weapons) and add a damage roll for the G (R/S): Rifle/Shotgun 
weapon. Impales are not applied as a result of fighting back. G (SMG): Submachine Gun At very long range, when only an Extreme success will hit the target, an impale only occurs with a critical hit (a roll of ‘01’). 
G (MG): Machine Gun Base Range: standard distance of weapon’s attack. Skill: skill required to use the weapon. 
Uses per Round: number of attacks that can be initiated per Damage: roll the dice indicated to determine weapon’s combat round (does not affect number of times a character damage. When an Extreme success is achieved with an may fight back with a melee weapon). Most firearms may fire 
attack roll the damage is increased. For the purpose of de-one bullet without penalty; more bullets up to the maximum termining increased damage weapons are divided into two (shown by the number in brackets) may be fired, but each groups: impaling and non-impaling. Non-impaling weapons shot is taken with a penalty die. Some weapons have burst or deliver maximum damage (plus maximum damage bonus if full auto capability, when using this, use the automatic fire applicable). It is important to note that only those initiating rules. an attack deal greater damage with an Extreme success; any successful attacks made as a result of fighting back do not Bullets in Gun (Magazine): there may be multiple options depending on the size of magazine or drum used. 
Cost: split by 1920s / modern era (modern-day prices reflect collectors’ market, 1920s prices do not). 
Common in Era: denotes availability by era. 
Malfunction (Mal): if die roll result equal to or higher than the firing weapon’s malfunction number, the shooter does not merely miss—the weapon does not fire. 
Rare: perhaps obsolete; a fine specimen for collectors or perhaps illegal. 
+DB: plus damage bonus, which varies by individual. 
Stun: target may not act for 1D6 rounds (or as the Keeper indicates). 
Burn: target must roll Luck to avoid catching on fire. Take minimum damage on following round. Double this each round until extinguished (providing target is flammable). 
Burst/Full Auto: some automatic weapons can be switched to fire burst or full auto, such firearms are usually unavailable to civilians; prices reflect black-market. 
1B, 2B: 1 barrel, 2 barrels. 
1/2, 1/3: can be accurately fired every second or third round. 
1 or 2: one or two barrels fireable in same round. 
N/A: not available (in auto-fire configuration or at all). 
2 yards, 3 yards, etc.: damage radius of explosion in yards; at up to double the range, the damage is halved. At up to triple the range, the damage is quartered. Beyond that damage is ignored. 
* See note below: 
Assault Rifle: use Rifle/Shotgun skill when firing single shot; use Submachine skill when firing burst or full auto. 
Chainsaw: very awkward to use as a weapon; double the user’s chance of a fumble. Chainsaw fumbles are horrible and cause 2D8 harm to the user as the chainsaw is likely to buck up towards to user’s head or shoulder, or cut down towards their legs or feet. Alternatively the chain can break and connect with the user’s body (2D8 damage). A malfunc­tion causes the engine to stall or the chain to jam or become displaced. A major wound from a chainsaw severs a random limb. 
Claymore Mine: The weapon has a cone of fire; allow nom­inal 120-degree effect. 
Col. Moran’s Air Rifle: Uses compressed air rather than ex­plosive propellant, achieving relatively silent operation. 
Dynamite stick and Hand grenade: Each delivers 4D10 damage to those within 3 yards, 2D10 to those within 6 yards and 1D10 to those within 9 yards. 
Garrote: Requires the victim to make a Fighting Maneuver to escape or suffer 1D6 damage per round. Effective only again human (or similar) opponents. 
GE Mini-Gun: Gatling style heavy machine gun, often mounted in helicopters. Hand-firing such a weapon without a mount takes minimum Build 2. 
Handguns: if firing more than one shot per round all rolls are made with one penalty die. Number in brackets denotes maximum number of shots that may be fired in one round. 
LAW: Light Antitank Weapon, disposable. 
Mace spray: Do not use the point-blank range rule for this weapon. The target should roll one-fifth or less of their DEX on 1D100 to avoid being temporarily blinded. Effective only against human (or similar) opponents. 
Rifles: Most rifles except .45 Martini-Henry Rifle and Col. Moran’s Air Rifle fire 1 shot per round. Reloading is what takes the time, not chambering the round. Assault rifles have a fire selector allowing for single shots or 3-round burst or full automatic fire. 
Shotguns: Do three levels of damage depending on their range, written as ‘short range/medium range/long range’. Rifles and handguns can impale, however shotguns, which fire a mass of smaller shot, cannot impale (although a shot­gun loaded with slugs instead of pellets could impale). This is not so say that shotguns are not deadly; an extreme level of success with a shotgun blast at close range will do 24 damage! 
Shotgun solid slugs: 10-gauge 1D10+7, 12-gauge 1D10+6, 16-gauge 1D10+5, 20-gauge 1D10+4; base ranges 50 yards. May impale. 
Taser (Contact or Dart): Affects only targets up to Build 2, stunned targets are incapacitated for 1D6 rounds (or as determined by the Keeper). 


Rules 
Making Skill Rolls: 
T State a goal before rolling any dice. 
T Determine the difficulty level for the roll. 
T Pushing the roll: can the player justify it? Keeper may foreshadow consequence of failure. 
T Check skills when used successfully. 
Critical success: 01. 
Fumble: 100 is always a fumble. If the dice roll required for success is below 50, a fumble occurs if 96—100 is rolled. 
Regular Difficulty Level: Opposing skill/characteristic is below 50, or the task is a standard one. The player needs to roll equal to or below his or her full skill or characteristic to succeed. 
Hard Difficulty Level: Opposing skill/characteristic is equal to or above 50, or the task is exceptionally difficult. The player needs to roll equal to or below half his or her skill or characteristic to succeed. 
Extreme Difficulty Level: Opposing skill/characteristic is equal to or above 90, or this task is on the borders of human capability. The player needs to roll equal to or below a fifth of his or her skill or characteristic to succeed. 
Opposed Rolls 
Use when two players are opposing one another. Both roll against agreed skill or characteristic. The one with the best level of success wins: 
A Critical success beats an Extreme success. 
An Extreme success beats a Hard success. 
A Hard success beats a Regular success. 
A Regular success beats a Failure or Fumble. 
In the case of a tie, the side with the higher skill (or charac­teristic) wins. If still tied either an impasse has been reached or both sides should re-roll. 
Opposed rolls cannot be pushed. 

skill roll (rolling 3 separate dice: one ‘units’ die and two ‘tens’ dice). Use the ‘tens’ dice that yields the better (lowest) result. For each penalty die: roll an additional ‘tens’ percentage die alongside the usual pair of percentage dice (rolling 3 separate dice: one "units" die and two "tens" dice). Use the ‘tens’ dice that yields the worse (highest) result. 
Human Limits and Skill Rolls 
The upper limit of what can be opposed is 100 + the investi­gator’s skill or characteristic. 
Starting with the lowest, deduct each investigator’s char­acteristic value in turn from the opposition’s characteristic. Continue doing this until the opponent’s characteristic has been reduced to a value that can be challenged by an inves­tigator. Investigators whose characteristics were not used to reduce the opposing factor may now make a skill roll, with an Extreme, Hard or Regular difficulty level, as determined by the value of the opposing characteristic. The opposition cannot be reduced to zero or lower by this method; a skill roll is always required. 
Combined Skill Rolls 
Used when a situation allows or demands the use of more than one skill. 
Only one dice roll is made; the result is then compared with each of the skills named. The Keeper will specify wheth­er a success is required for both skills, or if only one of the skills need be successful. 
Investigator Development Phase 
T Roll 1D100 for each skill checked. If the result is higher than the skill or over 95, add 1D10 skill points. 
T Erase ticks. 
T If an increase raises a skill to 90% or more, add 2D6 Sanity points. 
T Check Credit Rating and review finances (see Inves­tigator Development Phase: Employment and Credit Rating). 
T Seek to recover Sanity (see Chapter 7: Sanity). 
T Review the investigator’s background (see Altering an investigator’s background, page @@). 


Summary of Melee Combat 

1.
 Establish the order of attack: Rank all characters in DEX order—highest goes first. 

Surprise attacks: Allow a skill roll to determine whether the target anticipates the attack (Spot Hidden, Listen, Psychol­ogy). If successful, switch to the usual DEX combat order. Otherwise the attack automatically hits or gains a bonus die. 

2.
 Each character gets one action: Any action a character can make in a combat round—attacking, dodging, fighting back, fleeing, casting a spell, etc. Note: some NPCs and monsters have multiple actions. 

3.
 Determine the intention of the action: Is the intention to cause damage, dodge or a maneuver? 

4.
 The target of an attack may fight back, dodge the at­tack or attempt a maneuver of their own. 

5.
 Both sides make a skill roll. 


If the character chooses to fight back, use the target’s Fight­ing skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill. 
If the character chooses to dodge, use the target’s Dodge skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill. 
If the target is neither fighting back nor dodging, refer to Striking the first blow (Surprise Attacks) on page @@. 
6. Determine who was successful. 
a)
 Attacking a target that is fighting back: The side with the better level of success avoids being harmed, and inflicts damage on the opponent. In a draw the character initiating the attack beats the character that is fighting back. If both fail, no damage is inflicted. 

b)
 Attacking a target that is dodging: If the attacker gains a higher level of success, the attack is successful and the attacker inflicts damage on the loser. Otherwise the attack is dodged and no damage is dealt. In a draw the character dodging wins and evades the attack. If both fail, no damage is inflicted. 


Combat rolls cannot be pushed. 
7. Roll damage for successful attacks (see Table XVII: Weapons page @@, or 1D3 for unarmed human attack). 
If the attacker gains an Extreme level of success (not if fighting back) greater damage is inflicted: 
If the attacker is using an impaling weapon: maximum damage (maximum damage plus maximum damage bonus) plus roll weapon damage. 
If the attacker is using a non-impaling weapon (e.g. blunt): maximum damage (maximum damage plus maximum damage bonus). 
Summary of Fighting Maneuvers 
If the goal is something other than simply inflicting physical harm (e.g. disarm), resolve it with a maneuver. 
1. 
Compare Builds of the character performing the ma­neuver and the target: If attacker is smaller then they take 1 penalty die for each point of difference in Build. If difference is 3 or more, the maneuver is impossible. 

2.
 Make the attack roll: Same as for a regular Fighting attack (Brawling or appropriate fighting specialization skill). The opponent should choose to either dodge or fight back as they would for a normal attack: 


G If the target is dodging: Roll Fighting skill vs. Dodge skill. If the character performing the maneuver achieves a higher level of success than the character dodging, the maneuver is successful (if tied, the target is able to dodge the maneuver). 
G If the target is fighting back: Roll Fighting skill vs. Fighting skill. If the character fighting back achieves a higher level of success, the maneuver fails and the opponent inflicts damage on the character performing the maneuver (if tied, the maneuver is successful). 
G The target of an attack may use a maneuver of their own: Resolve as for fighting back, but apply the effect of their maneuver instead of inflicting damage. 
3. A successful maneuver allows the character to achieve one goal (see page @@). 
Other Combat Situations 
Outnumbered 
Once a character has either fought back or dodged once in the present combat round, all subsequent attacks on them are made with one bonus die. 
Characters and monsters that have more than one attack per round may also dodge or fight back that number of times before the bonus die is applied. Note that some Mythos enti­ties can never be outnumbered by investigators. 
Ranged and Thrown Attacks 
Ranged missile attacks (such as bows) are treated like firearms (target has the option of Diving for Cover, see page @@). 
Thrown weapons may be opposed with the Dodge skill in the same way as Fighting attacks (see Resolving a Fighting attack made against a target that is dodging, page @@). 

A character may not choose the option of fighting back against a ranged (missile) or thrown weapon attack unless he or she is already within close physical proximity to the attacker (within a fifth of their DEX in feet). 
Half the attacker’s damage bonus is applied to thrown weapons and missile weapons which rely directly on the user’s strength. Thus this applies to bows and slings but not to cross­bows. 
To resolve a ranged or thrown attack, the Keeper should set a difficulty level as for a firearm attack (see Firearms Difficulty Levels, page @@). 
Escaping Close Combat 
On their turn in the order of combat, providing a character has an escape route and is not physically restrained, their action can be used to flee melee combat. 
Armor 
Armor reduces the damage received: deduct the number of armor points from the damage. 
Summary of Firearms Combat 
To resolve a firearms attack, make a 1D100 roll and compare the result with the attacker’s Firearms skill (using the appro­priate specialization). The firearms roll is not opposed. The difficulty level is determined by the range, with various other factors granting either penalty or bonus dice. A failure never deals damage. 
Readied Firearms: Shoot at DEX + 50. 

Armor examples: 
Heavy leather jacket  1 point  
WWI helmet  2 points  
1" Hardwood  3 points  
Present U.S. Helmet  5 points  
Heavy Kevlar Vest  8 points  
Military Body Armor  12 points  
1.5" bulletproof glass  15 points  
1" Steel plate  19 points  
Large sand bag  20 points  


Firearms Difficulty Levels 

The difficulty level of a firearms skill roll is always set accord­ing to range. G Within base range: Regular difficulty level. 
G Long range (up to twice base range): Hard difficulty level. 
G Very long range (up to four times base range): Ex­treme difficulty level. 
Any further modifiers use bonus or penalty dice. 

Note: At very long range, when only an Extreme success will hit the target, an impale only occurs with a critical hit (a roll of 01). 
Firearm modifiers 

Once the difficulty level of a firearms attack has been set, all other factors that lend a distinct advantage or disadvantage are taken in to account. 
G Target is ‘diving for cover’ (Dodge roll success): one penalty die. 
G Target is partially concealed: one penalty die. 
G Point-blank range (within fifth DEX in feet): one bonus die. 
G Aiming (for one round): one bonus die. 
G Fast moving target (MOV 8+): one penalty die. 
G Target is small (Build –2): one penalty die. 
G Target is large (Build 4+): one bonus die. 
G Loading 1 bullet and shooting in same round: one penalty die. 
G Firing 2+ shots from a handgun in one round: one penalty die on all shots. 
G Firing into melee: one penalty die. 

Aiming: Must be declared on the character’s turn in the order of combat. The shot is taken on the same turn in the order of combat on the following round. If the aiming character takes damage or moves while aiming, the advantage of aiming is lost. 
Firing into melee combat: A fumble indicates an ally has been hit. If multiple allies are in the line of fire, the one with the lowest Luck score is hit. 

Reloading Firearms: One combat round to load two shells into any handgun, rifle or shotgun. Allow one round to exchange a clip. Allow two rounds to change a ma­chine gun belt. A Summary of 
Firearms Modifiers: Bonus
Full Auto/ 

and Penalty dice
Burst Fire 

Player declares the number of bullets to Difficulty Level Bonus Die Penalty Die be fired before rolling dice. Full auto fire 
Regular: Normal Aiming for 1 round Target diving for 
is divided into a number of volleys; each 
range cover 
volley requires a skill roll. Divide firer’s skill 
Hard: Long range Point blank Fast-moving target 
by 10 (round down) to determine how 
(MOV 8+) 

many bullets are in a volley (regardless of skill, a volley is never less than 3 bullets). Extreme: Very long Large target (Build Partial (50%+) con­range 4+) cealment 
The attacker must make a fresh attack roll for each volley of shots or whenever they select a new target. Burst fire is a single Small target (Build skill roll (a single volley). -2) 
Ammunition is expended when mov­ing between targets (one bullet per meter/ 
Multiple handgun

yard). 
shots 

Rolling to hit with Full Auto/Burst Fire: 
Loading and firing First attack roll: set difficulty by range one shot in a single and then apply any modifiers. round 
Second and further attack rolls: add Firing into melee one penalty die (or remove a bonus die) for each additional attack roll. If this would incur three penalty dice, stick with two penalty dice and raise the difficulty level by one step. 
Resolving each attack roll: 
G If the attack roll is successful: half of the shots fired hit the target—roll damage for half of the shots Armor examples:(round down, minimum of one). Subtract any armor from each shot. 
Heavy leather jacket 1 point G If the attack is an Extreme success: all shots fired hit WWI helmet 2 points the target, the first half (round down, minimum of 
1" Hardwood 3 points
one) of which impale. Subtract any armor from each Present U.S. Helmet 5 points

shot. As for all firearm attacks, if the difficulty level of the shot was Extreme, the best possible result is a Heavy Kevlar Vest 8 points successful hit and not an impale. 
Military Body Armor 12 points Malfunctions: Any attack roll result equal to or higher than 1.5" bulletproof glass 15 points the firing weapon’s malfunction number indicates that the 
1" Steel plate 19 points

weapon malfunctions and does not fire. 
Large sand bag 20 points 





Table III: Other Forms of Damage 
Injury Damage Examples 
Minor: a person could survive Punch, kick, head-butt, mild acid, breathing smoky atmosphere*, a numerous occurrences of this level 1D3 thrown fist-size rock, falling (per 10 feet) on to soft swamp. 

of damage. 

Moderate: might cause a major Falling (per 10 feet) on to grass, club, strong acid, breathing water*, wound; it would take a few such 1D6 exposure to vacuum*, small caliber bullet, arrow, fire (burning attacks to kill. torch). 
Severe: likely to cause a major .38 caliber bullet, falling (per 10 feet) on to concrete, axe, fire wound. One or two occurrences (flamethrower, running through a burning room), being 6 to 9 
1D10

would render a person uncon-yards from an exploding hand grenade or stick of dynamite, a mild scious or dead. poison**. 
Deadly: the average person has a Hit by a car at 30mph, being 3 to 6 yards from an exploding hand 
2D10

50% chance of dying. grenade or stick of dynamite, a strong poison**. 
Hit by a speeding car, being within 3 yards of an exploding hand Terminal: outright death is likely. 4D10 grenade or stick of dynamite, a lethal poison**. 
Splat: outright death almost Being involved in a high-speed head-on collision, being hit by a 
8D10

certain. train. 
*Asphyxiation and drowning: a CON roll should be made each round; once a CON roll is failed, damage is sustained each round thereafter until death or until the victim is able to breathe. If the character is in a state of physical exertion, a Hard success is required on the CON roll. **Poisons: a roll equal to or less than one-fifth of CON will halve damage from poisons. Poisons may cause a variety of additional symptoms including: stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, sweats, cramps, jaundice, altered heart rate, impaired vision, convulsions, unconsciousness and paralysis. It is up to the Keeper whether the symptoms permit the victim to act or not, or to act with a penalty die or an increased level of difficulty. 
In certain circumstances, Keepers may allow a poison's effects to be shaken off if the CON roll is a critical success. 

Combat Flow Chart 







Combat Damage Flow Chart 



Summary of Chase Rules 

Establishing the chase 
Decide whether fleeing characters/vehicles are heading in same direction or splitting up. If splitting up, decide which pursuers are chasing which characters/vehicles. If you have multiple groups, treat each one as a separate chase. 
Speed roll: All participants make a skill roll: CON (if on foot or other self-propelled mode) or Drive Auto (for vehicles). 
If passed: MOV remains unchanged. 
If an Extreme success: MOV +1. 
If failed: MOV –1. 
Order each group separately (pursuers and those fleeing) in order of MOV. 
Fleeing characters/vehicles with a speed greater than any of their pursuers may escape completely. 
Pursuers with a speed that is lower than the slowest flee­ing character are completely out of the chase. 
Cut to the chase 

Place the pursuers: Place pursuers in order, slowest at the rear, others a number of locations ahead equal to their differ­ence in MOV. 
Place the fleeing characters: Place the fleeing characters/ vehicles in order, slowest at the rear (2 locations ahead of the lead pursuer), others a number of locations ahead equal to their difference in MOV. 
Position hazards and barriers. 
Allocate each participant a number of movement ac­tions: Every character and vehicle gets one movement action by default. To this is added the difference between their movement rating (MOV) and the movement rating of the slowest participant in the chase. 
Determine DEX order 
Hazards: Make a skill roll to move through a hazard. If the skill roll is failed, the Keeper may inflict damage (see Table 
III: Other forms of damage, page @@, or Table VI: Vehicular collisions, page @@) and delay (1D3 movement actions). 
Cautious approach to hazards: 1 or 2 movement actions may be spent to buy 1 or 2 bonus dice for the skill roll to negotiate a hazard. 
Barrier: Either a barrier must be broken down or a skill roll must also be made before a character/vehicle can move on to the next location. If appropriate, the Keeper may wish to inflict damage and delay as for a hazard. 
Breaking down barriers: Vehicles inflict 1D10 damage for each point of their Build. If a vehicle attacks a barrier and fails to destroy it, the vehicle is wrecked. If the barrier is destroyed, the vehicle suffers an amount of damage equal to half the barrier’s hit points prior to impact. 
Internal door or thin wooden fence: 5 hit points. 
Standard back door: 10 hit points. 
Strong domestic external door: 15 hit points. 
9” brick wall: 25 hit points. 
Mature tree: 50 hit points. 
Concrete bridge support: 100 hit points. 
Attacks: Cost 1 movement action to initiate (except if ranged). Resolve as regular combat. 
Vehicles in combat: Substitute Drive Auto for both Fighting and Dodge skills. A vehicle can be used as a weapon (1D10 damage per listed build point). Whenever a vehicle is used to inflict damage it also suffers an amount of damage equal to half (round down) that which it delivers, but never enough to cause it to lose a greater amount of build points than the thing which it hit originally possessed. Each full 10 hit points of damage decreases a vehicle’s build by one point (round down); damage below 10 points is ignored. 
Random locations: Roll 1D100: 
01-59 = 1 open location 
60+ = 1 Regular hazard 
85+ = 1 Hard hazard 
96+ = 1 Extreme hazard 
Environment is especially hazardous: add a penalty die. 
Environment is unlikely to have any dangers or delays: 
add a bonus die. 
Sudden hazards: Once per round there is the option to call for a group Luck roll. Winner (Keeper or players) gets to place a regular hazard where they wish. Keeper and players must alternate in who calls for a sudden hazard. 
Pedal to the metal 
A driver can elect to move 2 or 3 locations with one move­ment action. Any hazards encountered have one penalty die applied to the skill rolls. 
A driver can elect to move 4 or 5 locations with one move­ment action. Any hazards encountered have two penalty dice applied to the skill rolls. 
One passenger can assist the driver with navigation and spotting ways to negotiate hazards. With a successful Spot Hidden or Navigate roll, on the vehicle’s next move, the vehicle can accelerate once with 1 fewer penalty die. 
Firearms: Penalty die while moving. No penalty die if remaining stationary and spending 1 movement action. 
Tires: Penalty die to target tires. Armor:3. Hit points: 2 (only damaged by impaling weapons). Destroying a tire reduces vehicle Build by 1. 
Driver damage: If the driver of a moving vehicle takes a major wound he or she may lose control of their vehicle and must roll immediately as for a Hazard at Hard difficul­ty level. 
Switching between being running and driving: Make a fresh speed roll. Recalcu­late movement actions. 
Monsters in chases 
(skills) 
Where the monster or non-player character has an implied aptitude, use their DEX in place of the skill. 
Where the monster or non-player char­acter has an implied ineptitude, use one-fifth of their DEX in place of the skill (or simply rule the attempt to be an automatic failure). 
Where the monster or non-player character has neither implied aptitude nor ineptitude, use half of their DEX in place of the skill. 
If other skills are required, the Keeper might use a similar approach, using what he or she feels to be the most appropriate char­acteristic from which to derive skill values. 


Table VI: Vehicular Collisions 
Incident Minor incident: 
Most Regular Hazards. May be cosmetic damage only, possibly something serious. 
Moderate incident: 
Most Hard Hazards. Might cause major damage. Might wreck a car. . 
Severe incident: 
Most Extreme Haz­ards. Likely to wreck a car outright. 
Mayhem: Likely to wreck a truck outright. Almost certain to wreck a car. 
Road kill: Most vehicles will be little more than scattered debris. 
Damage 
1D3-1 Build 
1D6 Build 
1D10 Build 
2D10 Build 
5D10 Build 
Examples 
Glancing blow from another vehicle, grazing a lamppost, hitting a post, colliding with person or similar-sized creature. 
Hitting a cow or large deer, collision with a heavy motorbike or economy car. 
Collision with a standard car, lamp post or tree. 
Collision with a truck or coach or a mature tree. 
Collision with a juggernaut or a train, hit by a meteor. 


Summary: Five Steps to Setting Up a Chase 
To sum up, there are five steps for the Keeper to perform when setting up a chase: 
G Place the pursuer. 
G Place the fleeing character. 
G Position hazards and barriers. 
G Allocate each participant a number of move­
ment actions. G Determine DEX order. 



The following vehicles use the Drive Auto skill. 
Vehicle MOV Build Armor for Passengers people 

Car, economy 13 4 1 3 or 4 
Car, standard 14 5 2 4 Car, deluxe 15 6 2 4 Sports car 16 5 2 1 Pickup truck 14 6 2 2+ 6-ton truck 13 7 2 2+ 18-wheeler 13 9 2 3+ 
Motorcycle, light 13 1 0 1 Motorcycle, heavy 16 3 0 1 
Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require a substantial crew. 
Air Vehicles MOV Build Armor for Passengers people 
Dirigible 12 10 2 112+ 
Propeller plane 15 5 1 4+ Bomber plane 17 11 2 10+ Jet plane 18 11 3 50+ Helicopter 15 5 2 15+ 
Vehicles on the following chart require specialist training to operate; the skill Operate Heavy Machinery might be substituted. 
Heavy Vehicles MOV Build Armor Passengers for people 
Tank 1120 24 4 Steam train 12 12 1 400+ Modern train 15 14 2 400+ 
Vehicles on the following chart use the Ride skill. 
Other forms of MOV Build Armor for Passengers transport people 
Horse (with 11 4 0 1 rider) 4-horse carriage 10 3 0 6+ Bicycle 7 0.5 0 1 
Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require a substantial crew. The armor value is for those on deck. 
MOV  Build  Armor for  Passengers  
people  
6  2  0  3  
12  4  0  22  
14  3  0  6  
11  32  0  2200+  
11  65  0  1800+  
11  75  0  3200+  
12  24  0  120+  

Key 

MOV: A rating of the vehicle’s speed and maneuverability in chases. These ratings are for modern vehicles and may be re­duced by around 20% for 1920s vehicles (though there were cars in the 1920s that could exceed 100 MPH). Build: A rating of the strength and size of the vehicle. When reduced to zero, the vehicle is out of action. Each full 10 hit points of damage decreases a vehicle’s build by 1 point (round down); damage below 10 hit points is ignored. 
If a vehicle’s build is reduced to half (round down) of its starting value or lower, it is impaired; one penalty die is applied to all Drive Auto (or appropriate skill) rolls. 
If a vehicle takes damage equal to its full build value in one incident, the vehicle is completely wrecked in an impressive manner. It may explode, burn, roll or suffer some combination thereof. All occupants of the vehicle are likely to die. Whether or not investigators have a chance of survival is up to the Keeper: Luck rolls may be allowed. Those who are fortunate get thrown free, though it is recommended they take at least 2D10 damage. 
If a vehicle’s build is otherwise reduced to zero by cumulative damage (i.e. in increments of less than the vehicle’s starting build value), it becomes undrivable, grinding to a halt. Depending on the situation (and perhaps a Luck roll) this may lead to an acci­dent resulting in 1D10 damage for the driver and each passenger. Armor for people: The armor rating is for the passengers and driver, reflecting the number of points of armor the vehicle pro­vides against external attacks. Passengers and crew: The number of people that can be ac­commodated. 


Summary of Sanity Rules 
Failing a Sanity roll: one involuntary action. Sanity loss of 5 points or more: make an Intelligence roll— if successful, temporary insanity ensues. Sanity loss of one-fifth or more in one day: indefinite insanity ensues. 
The Phases of Insanity 
A bout of madness: either "real time" (1D10 rounds) or "summary" (1D10 hours); Keeper amends one backstory detail (phobia, mania, etc.) Underlying Insanity: any further Sanity loss results in an­other bout of madness; the investigator is prone to delusions. 
The Side-effects of Insanity 
1.
 Phobias: while insane, must fight/flee or take a penalty die on skill rolls. 

2. 
Manias: while insane, must submit to mania or take a penalty die on skill rolls. 

3.
 Delusions and Reality Checks: make a Sanity roll to test 

for delusions: Failure: lose 1 Sanity point (and undergo a bout of madness if insane). Success: dismiss delusions. 

4.
 Insanity and the Cthulhu Mythos: add 5% Cthulhu Mythos skill with first bout of madness inspired by a Mythos related event. Add 1% on subsequent occasions. 


Recovery 
From temporary insanity: after 1D10 hours or a good rest. 
From indefinite insanity: roll at the end of each month of treatment; Keeper may allow automatic recovery during the next investigator development phase. 
Treatment with private/home care (roll 1D100 per month): 01–95: success (or under psychoanalysis skill); add 1D3 San­ity points. Make a Sanity roll—if successful, insanity is cured. 96–100: failure; lose 1D6 Sanity points. 
Treatment at institution (roll 1D100 per month): 01–50: success (or under psychoanalysis skill); add 1D3 San­ity points. Make a Sanity roll—if successful, insanity is cured. 51-95: no progress. 96–100: failure; lose 1D6 Sanity points. 

Getting Used to the Awfulness 
The player records the cumulative Sanity points lost to a given Mythos entity (e.g. deep ones); the cumulative loss should not exceed the maximum amount for a single encounter with that entity. Lower the recorded cumulative loss by 1 with each investigator development phase. 


Table VII: Bouts of Madness— Real Time (roll 1D10): 
1) Amnesia: The investigator has no memory of events that have taken place since they were last in a place of safety. For example, it seems to them that one moment they were eating breakfast and the next they are facing a monster. This lasts for 1D10 rounds. 
2) Psychosomatic disability: The investigator suffers psychosomatic blindness, deafness, or loss of the use of a limb or limbs for 1D10 rounds. 
3) Violence: A red mist descends on the investigator and they explode in a spree of uncontrolled violence and destruction directed at their surroundings, allies or foes alike for 1D10 rounds. 
4) Paranoia: The investigator suffers severe paranoia for 1D10 rounds; everyone is out to get them; no one can be trusted; they are being spied on; someone has betrayed them; what they are seeing is a trick. 
5) Significant Person: Review the investigator’s backstory entry for Significant People. The investigator mistakes another person in the scene for their Significant Person. Consider the nature of the relationship; the investigator acts upon it. This lasts 1D10 rounds. 
6) Faint: The investigator faints. They recover after 1D10 rounds. 
7) Flee in panic: The investigator is compelled to get as far away as possible by whatever means are available, even if it means taking the only vehicle and leaving everyone else behind. They travel for 1D10 rounds. 
8) Physical hysterics or emotional outburst: The investigator is incapacitated from laughing, crying, screaming, etc. for 1D10 rounds. 
9) Phobia: Investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table IX: Sample phobias, or the Keeper may choose one. Even if the source of the phobia is not present, the investigator imagines it is there for the next 1D10 rounds. 
10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table X: Sample manias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator seeks to indulge in their new mania for the next 1D10 rounds. 
Table VIII : Bouts of Madness—Summary (roll 1D10): 
1) Amnesia: The investigator comes to their senses in some unfamiliar place with no memory of who they are. Their memories will slowly return to them over time. 
2) Robbed: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having been robbed. They are unharmed. If they were carrying a Treasured Possession (see investigator backstory), make a Luck roll to see if it was stolen. Everything else of value is automatically missing. 
3) Battered: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later to find themselves battered and bruised. Hit points are reduced to half of what they were before going insane, though this does not cause a Major wound. They have not been robbed. How the damage was sustained is up to the Keeper. 
4) Violence: The investigator explodes in a spree of violence and destruction. When the investigator comes to their senses, their actions may or may not be apparent or remembered. Who or what the investigator has inflicted violence upon and whether they have killed or simply inflicted harm is up to the Keeper. 
5) Ideology/Beliefs: Review the investigator’s backstory entry for Ideology and Beliefs. The investigator manifests one of these in an extreme, crazed and demonstrative manner. For example, a religious person might be found later, preaching the gospel loudly on the subway. 
6) Significant People: Consult the investigator’s backstory entry for Significant People and why the relationship is so important. In the time that passes (1D10 hours or more) the investigator has done their best to get close to that person and act upon their relationship in some way. 
7) Institutionalized: The investigator comes to their senses in a psychiatric ward or police cell. They may slowly recall the events that led them there. 
8) Flee in panic: When the investigator comes to their senses they are far away, perhaps lost in the wilderness or on a train or long-distance bus. 
9) Phobia: The investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table IX: Sample phobias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having taken every precaution to avoid their new phobia. 
10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table X: Sample Manias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later. During this bout of madness, the investigator will have been fully indulging in their new mania. Whether this is apparent to other people is up to the Keeper and player. 

Summary of Magic Rules 
Initial reading of a tome: may require reading roll; variable duration (hours to weeks at the Keeper’s discretion); results in Sanity point loss (if a believer); reader gains of half the tome’s listed Cthulhu Mythos skill points. 
Reading roll: 
Printed within the last century and in good condition: 
Regular difficulty. 
Handwritten (especially if old): Hard difficulty level. 
Most challenging of ancient, moldering tomes: Extreme difficulty level. 
Full study of a tome: an initial reading must first be com­pleted; no reading roll required; see Table XI: Mythos Tomes (page @@) for study time; results in Sanity point loss (if a believer); if the tome’s Mythos rating is greater than the read­er’s Cthulhu Mythos skill, the reader gains the full Cthulhu Mythos benefit; if Cthulhu Mythos skill is greater than tome’s Mythos rating, gain only half Cthulhu Mythos benefit; each subsequent full study doubles in study time. 
For details of tomes see Chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore and Forgotten Secrets. 
Initial reading: Reading roll may be required. Keeper decides on time required. Roll for Sanity loss and increase Cthulhu Mythos skill by tome's CMI value. 
Using a tome as a reference book: must have completed a full study; 1D4 hours; roll less than or equal to the book’s Cthulhu Mythos Rating. 
Magic points, overspending: take additional Magic points from hit points. 
Magic points, recovery: 1 Magic point per hour (more if POW is over 100). 
Learning a spell from a Mythos book: complete an Initial reading; variable duration (hours to weeks at Keeper’s discre­tion, typically 2D6 weeks); make a Hard INT roll (optional). 
Learning a spell from another person: as from a book but faster. 
Learning a spell from a Mythos entity: very fast; INT roll to retain spell. 
Initial casting of a spell: make a Hard POW roll; either Push or fully relearn spell; failing the Pushed roll allows the spell to be cast but costs 1D6 x MP and Sanity points, and incurs other side-effects. 

Casting time and spells in combat (see Chapter 12: Grimoire): instantaneous—on the user’s DEX+50; one round—it activates on the user’s DEX in the present round; two rounds—it activates in the following round on the user’s DEX, and so on. 
Believer: while a nonbeliever, gain Cthulhu Mythos skill but do not lose Sanity points for reading tomes; with first loss of Sanity points to direct experience of the Cthulhu Mythos, also lose Sanity points equal to Cthulhu Mythos skill. 
Increasing POW 
A spell requiring an opposed POW roll to affect a target is successfully cast (the opposed roll is won)—roll 1D100; if greater than POW (or roll 96 or greater), POW increases by 1D10 points permanently. 
A Luck roll result of 01—roll 1D100; if greater than POW (or roll 96 or greater), POW increases by 1D10 points permanently. 


Quick Reference Chart for Half and Fifth Values 
Find the characteristic or skill value under the Base Number column, and read across to determine the half (Hard) and fifth (Extreme) values. 
Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  Base Number  Half Value (½)  Fifth Value (1/5)  
1  0  0  26  13  5  51  25  10  76  38  15  
2  1  27  52  26  77  
3  28  14  53  78  39  
4  2  29  54  27  79  
5  1  30  15  6  55  11  80  40  16  
6  3  31  56  28  81  
7  32  16  57  82  41  
8  4  33  58  29  83  
9  34  17  59  84  42  
10  5  2  35  7  60  30  12  85  17  
11  36  18  61  86  43  
12  6  37  62  31  87  
13  38  19  63  88  44  
14  7  39  64  32  89  
15  3  40  20  8  65  13  90  45  18  
16  8  41  66  33  91  
17  42  21  67  92  46  
18  9  43  68  34  93  
19  44  22  69  94  47  
20  10  4  45  9  70  35  14  95  19  
21  46  23  71  96  48  
22  11  47  72  36  97  
23  48  24  73  98  49  
24  12  49  74  37  99  
25  5  50  25  10  75  15  100  50  20  

Sanity quiz 
H.P. Lovecraft was known for his use of unusual words, which lent his writing a particular flavor. You may find the following list of Lovecraftian words useful and in­spirational in play. 
A word of caution—reading the entire list causes 1D3 sanity loss! 
Aberrant, Abnormal, Abominable, Absurd, Abysmal, Accursed, Acidic, Adhesive, Airy, Alien, Ambiguous, Amorphous, Anarchic, Ancient, Angular, Animalistic, Animated, Anomalous, Antediluvian, Antiquarian, Ap­palling, Appendaged, Ashen, Askew, Astounding, Atro­cious, Awry, Baboon-Like, Baleful, Baneful, Bankrupt, Barbarous, Batrachian, Beastly, Bellowing, Bilious, Bizarre, Blasphemous, Bleating, Bloated, Bloodshot, Blubbery, Boiling, Brutish, Bug-eyed, Bulbous, Cack­ling, Cadaverous, Cancerous, Cellular, Changeable, Chaotic, Charnel, Chattering, Chitinous, Coarse, Colorless, Colossal, Confusing, Congealed, Conical, Convoluted, Corpselike, Corpulent, Corrupt, Creamy, Criminal, Croaking, Crustaceous, Crystalline, Cyclo­pean, Cylindrical, Daemonic, Dank, Dark, Dazzling, Deafening, Deathless, Debased, Debauched, Decadent, Decomposing, Deformed, Degenerate, Degraded, De­lirious, Depraved, Deranged, Detestable, Deviant, Dia­bolical, Diffuse, Dire, Discordant, Diseased, Disfigured, Disgusting, Dislocated, Disordered, Disproportionate, Dissolved, Distorted, Dreadful, Dripping, Effervescent, Effulgence, Effusive, Elastic, Eldritch, Elephantine, Endless, Enlarged, Enormous, Enveloping, Evasive, Ex­aggerated, Excruciating, Extended, Fabulous, Faceless, Fantastic, Fearful, Fecund, Festering, Fibrous, Fiendish, Fiery, Filthy, Fishlike, Flabby, Flowing, Fluctuating, Fluid, Foaming, Fetid, Foul, Fractured, Fragrant, Frantic, Fungous, Fungoid, Furious, Furtive, Gambrel, Gangrenous, Gargantuan, Gaunt, Ghastly, Ghoulish, Gibbering, Gibbous, Gigantic, Globular, Glutinous, Gluttonous, Gnashing, Gory, Grasping, Greenish, Grim, Grisly, Gross, Grotesque, Gushing, Hairy, Hal­lucinatory, Hapless, Hateful, Hazy, Heaving, Hellish, Hideous, Hissing, Horned, Horrible, Howling, Huge, Hybrid, Ichorous, Idiotic, Illogical, Immaterial, Imme­morial, Immense, Immoral, Indescribable, Incoherent, Incomplete, Incongruous, Incredible, Indistinct, Infect­ed, Infernal, Infested, Inhuman, Insane, Insipid, Irides­cent, Irrational, Irregular, Jabbering, Jaded, Jangling, Jaundiced, Jellified, Jumbled, Jutting, Kleptomaniacal, Leprous, Limp, Liquefied, Loathsome, Lumbering, Luminescent, Lumpy, Lunatic, Lurking, Mad, Maggoty, Malevolent, Malformed, Malicious, Malignant, Mas­sive, Membranous, Menacing, Mesmerizing, Metallic, Mildewed, Mindless, Miscarried, Misshapen, Moaning, Molten, Monstrous, Monumental, Morbid, Mortifying, Mottled, Moldering, Mucky, Mucous, Murmuring, Mutilated, Nagging, Nameless, Nauseous, Nearsighted, Nebulous, Necromantic, Necrotic, Nightmarish, Noise­less, Noisome, Non-Euclidian, Nonsensical, Noxious, Numbing, Obscene, Obsequious, Octopoid, Odious, Odorous, Oily, Ominous, Oozing, Organic, Outlandish, Outré, Oval, Overgrown, Overripe, Pagan, Pale, Pallid, Palpitating, Palsied, Parasitic, Pasty, Peculiar, Perfidious, Perverse, Phlegmatic, Pitiless, Plastic, Pliable, Poison­ous, Porous, Pregnant, Prodigious, Profane, Profuse, Pronged, Protoplasmic, Protuberant, Prurient, Pseu­dopoidal, Puckered, Pudding-Like, Pulsating, Pustular, Putrid, Quavering, Queasy, Quiescent, Quivering, Ra­diant, Rainbowed, Rectangular, Reeking, Remorseless, Repellent, Reprehensible, Reptilian, Repugnant, Re­pulsive, Resplendent, Restless, Rheumy, Rigid, Rotten, Rotting, Rough, Rubbery, Rugose, Sacrilegious, Sallow, Sanguine, Scabby, Scaly, Screaming, Scummy, Seething, Senseless, Sepulchral, Shadowy, Shiny, Shrieking, Shuf­fling, Shunned, Sickly, Sightless, Sinewy, Singular, Skel­etal, Sleepless, Slimy, Slippery, Slithering, Slobbering, Sluggish, Solemn, Sordid, Soundless, Spectral, Spheri­cal, Sponge-Like, Squamous, Stagnant, Stench, Sticky, Stupefying, Stupendous, Stygian, Sulphurous, Syrupy, Teeming, Tenebrous, Tentacled, Terrible, Thickening, Thrashing, Throbbing, Transformed, Transparent, Tu­bular, Tumultuous, Turbid, Turbulent, Ugly, Ultimate, Ululating, Unclean, Uncouth, Undigested, Ungainly, Unknown, Unmasked, Unmentionable, Unnamable, Unnatural, Unripe, Unseen, Unspeakable, Unutter­able, Vague, Vaporous, Vast, Vibrating, Vile, Viperous, Viscous, Vivid, Voluminous, Vomiting, Wailing, Wan, Warped, Waxen, Webbed, Wet, Whirling, Withered, Worm-eaten, Wormy, Wretched, Writhing, Xenopho­bic, Yammering, Zodiacal, Zymotic. 